Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval
Explainable Recommendation: A
Survey and New Perspectives
Suggested Citation:Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen (2020), “Explainable Recommenda-
tion: A Survey and New Perspectives”, Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval:
Vol. 14, No. 1, pp 1–101. DOI: 10.1561/1500000066.
Yongfeng Zhang
Rutgers University, USA
yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu
Xu Chen
Tsinghua University, China
xu-ch14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
This article may be used only for the purpose of research, teaching,
and/or private study. Commercial use or systematic downloading
(by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without ex-
plicit Publisher approval. Boston — Delft
Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Explainable Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2 A Historical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Classiﬁcation of the Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4 Explainability and Eﬀectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5 Explainability and Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.6 How to Read the Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2 Information Source for Explanations 13
2.1 Relevant User or Item Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2 Feature-based Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3 Opinion-based Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4 Sentence Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.5 Visual Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.6 Social Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.7 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3 Explainable Recommendation Models 29
3.1 Overview of Machine Learning for Recommendation . . . . 30
3.2 Factorization Models for Explainable Recommendation . . 31
3.3 Topic Modeling for Explainable Recommendation . . . . . 35
3.4 Graph-based Models for Explainable Recommendation . . . 38
3.5 Deep Learning for Explainable Recommendation . . . . . . 40
3.6 Knowledge Graph-based Explainable Recommendation . . . 46
3.7 Rule Mining for Explainable Recommendation . . . . . . . 49
3.8 Model Agnostic and Post Hoc Explainable Recommendation 51
3.9 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation 56
4.1 User Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.2 Online Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.3 Oﬄine Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.4 Qualitative Evaluation by Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5 Explainable Recommendation in Diﬀerent Applications 65
5.1 Explainable E-commerce Recommendation . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2 Explainable Point-of-Interest Recommendation . . . . . . . 66
5.3 Explainable Social Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.4 Explainable Multimedia Recommendation . . . . . . . . . 69
5.5 Other Explainable Recommendation Applications . . . . . 70
5.6 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6 Open Directions and New Perspectives 72
6.1 Methods and New Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6.2 Evaluation and User Behavior Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6.3 Explanation for Broader Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
6.4 Cognitive Science Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
7 Conclusions 80
Acknowledgements 82
References 83
Explainable Recommendation: A
Survey and New Perspectives
Yongfeng Zhang1 and Xu Chen2
1Rutgers University, USA; yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu
2Tsinghua University, China; xu-ch14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Explainable recommendation attempts to develop models
that generate not only high-quality recommendations but
also intuitive explanations. The explanations may either be
post-hoc or directly come from an explainable model (also
called interpretable or transparent model in some contexts).
Explainable recommendation tries to address the problem
of why: by providing explanations to users or system design-
ers, it helps humans to understand why certain items are
recommended by the algorithm, where the human can either
be users or system designers. Explainable recommendation
helps to improve the transparency, persuasiveness, eﬀective-
ness, trustworthiness, and satisfaction of recommendation
systems. It also facilitates system designers for better system
debugging. In recent years, a large number of explainable rec-
ommendation approaches – especially model-based methods
– have been proposed and applied in real-world systems.
In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review for the
explainable recommendation research. We ﬁrst highlight the
position of explainable recommendation in recommender
system research by categorizing recommendation problems
into the 5W, i.e., what, when, who, where, and why. We then
Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen (2020), “Explainable Recommendation: A Survey
and New Perspectives”, Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval: Vol. 14,
No. 1, pp 1–101. DOI: 10.1561/1500000066.
2
conduct a comprehensive survey of explainable recommen-
dation on three perspectives: 1) We provide a chronological
research timeline of explainable recommendation, including
user study approaches in the early years and more recent
model-based approaches. 2) We provide a two-dimensional
taxonomy to classify existing explainable recommendation
research: one dimension is the information source (or display
style) of the explanations, and the other dimension is the
algorithmic mechanism to generate explainable recommen-
dations. 3) We summarize how explainable recommendation
applies to diﬀerent recommendation tasks, such as product
recommendation, social recommendation, and POI recom-
mendation.
We also devote a section to discuss the explanation per-
spectives in broader IR and AI/ML research. We end the
survey by discussing potential future directions to promote
the explainable recommendation research area and beyond.
1
Introduction
1.1 Explainable Recommendation
Explainable recommendation refers to personalized recommendation
algorithms that address the problem ofwhy – they not only provide users
or system designers with recommendation results, but also explanations
to clarify why such items are recommended. In this way, it helps to
improve the transparency, persuasiveness, eﬀectiveness, trustworthiness,
and user satisfaction of the recommendation systems. It also facilitates
system designers to diagnose, debug, and reﬁne the recommendation
algorithm.
To highlight the position of explainable recommendation in the
recommender system research area, we classify personalized recommen-
dation with a broad conceptual taxonomy. Speciﬁcally, personalized
recommendation research can be classiﬁed into the 5W problems –
when, where, who, what, and why, corresponding to time-aware rec-
ommendation (when), location-based recommendation (where), social
recommendation (who), application-aware recommendation (what), and
explainable recommendation (why), where explainable recommendation
aims to answerwhy-type questions in recommender systems.
3
4 Introduction
Explainable recommendation models can either be model-intrinsic
or model-agnostic (Lipton, 2018; Molnar, 2019). The model-intrinsic
approach develops interpretable models, whose decision mechanism is
transparent, and thus, we can naturally provide explanations for the
model decisions (Zhanget al., 2014a). The model-agnostic approach
(Wang et al., 2018d), or sometimes called the post-hoc explanation
approach (Peake and Wang, 2018), allows the decision mechanism to
be a blackbox. Instead, it develops an explanation model to generate
explanations after a decision has been made. The philosophy of these two
approaches is deeply rooted in our understanding of human cognitive
psychology – sometimes we make decisions by careful, rational reasoning
and we can explain why we make certain decisions; other times we make
decisions ﬁrst and then ﬁnd explanations for the decisions to support
or justify ourselves (Lipton, 2018; Miller, 2019).
The scope of explainable recommendation not only includes de-
veloping transparent machine learning, information retrieval, or data
mining models. It also includes developing eﬀective methods to deliver
the recommendations or explanations to users or system designers, be-
cause explainable recommendations naturally involve humans in the
loop. Signiﬁcant research eﬀorts in user behavior analysis and human-
computer interaction community aim to understand how users interact
with explanations.
With this section, we will introduce not only the explainable recom-
mendation problem, but also a big picture of the recommender system
research area. It will help readers to understand what is unique about
the explainable recommendation problem, what is the position of ex-
plainable recommendation in the research area, and why explainable
recommendation is important to the area.
1.2 A Historical Overview
In this section, we will provide a historical overview of the explainable
recommendation research. Though the termexplainable recommendation
was formally introduced in recent years (Zhanget al., 2014a), the basic
concept,however,datesbacktosomeoftheearliestworksinpersonalized
1.2. A Historical Overview 5
recommendation research. For example, Schaferet al.(1999) noted that
recommendations could be explained by other items that the user is
familiar with, such asthis product you are looking at is similar to these
other products you liked before, which leads to the fundamental idea of
item-based collaborative ﬁltering (CF); Herlockeret al.(2000) studied
how to explain CF algorithms in MovieLens based on user surveys; and
Sinha and Swearingen (2002) highlighted the role of transparency in
recommender systems. Besides, even before explainable recommendation
has attracted serious research attention, the industry has been using
manual or semi-automatic explanations in practical systems, such as
the people also viewedexplanation in e-commerce systems (Tintarev
and Masthoﬀ, 2007a).
To help the readers understand the “pre-history” research of recom-
mendation explanation and how explainable recommendation emerged
as an essential research task in the recent years, we provide a historical
overview of the research line in this section.
Early approaches to personalized recommender systems mostly fo-
cused on content-based or collaborative ﬁltering (CF)-based recommen-
dation (Ricciet al., 2011). Content-based recommender systems model
user and item proﬁles with various available content information, such
as the price, color, brand of the goods in e-commerce, or the genre,
director, duration of the movies in review systems (Balabanović and
Shoham, 1997; Pazzani and Billsus, 2007). Because the item contents
are easily understandable to users, it was usually intuitive to explain
to users why an item is recommended. For example, one straightfor-
ward way is to let users know the content features he/she might be
interested in the recommended item. Ferwerdaet al.(2012) provided a
comprehensive study of possible protocols to provide explanations for
content-based recommendations.
However, collecting content information in diﬀerent application do-
mains is time-consuming. Collaborative ﬁltering (CF)-based approaches
(Ekstrand et al., 2011), on the other hand, attempt to avoid this dif-
ﬁculty by leveragingthe wisdom of crowds. One of the earliest CF
algorithms is User-based CF for the GroupLens news recommendation
system (Resnicket al., 1994). User-based CF represents each user as
a vector of ratings, and predicts the user’s missing rating on a news
6 Introduction
message based on the weighted average of other users’ ratings on the
message. Symmetrically, Sarwaret al.(2001) introduced the Item-based
CF method, and Lindenet al.(2003) further described its application
in Amazon product recommendation system. Item-based CF takes each
item as a vector of ratings, and predicts the missing rating based on
the weighted average of ratings from similar items.
Though the rating prediction mechanism would be relatively diﬃcult
to understand for average users, user- and item-based CF are somewhat
explainable due to the philosophy of their algorithm design. For example,
the items recommended by user-based CF can be explained as “users
that are similar to you loved this item”, while item-based CF can
be explained as “the item is similar to your previously loved items”.
However, although the idea of CF has achieved signiﬁcant improvement
in recommendation accuracy, it is less intuitive to explain compared
with content-based algorithms. Research pioneers in very early stages
also noticed the importance of the problem (Herlocker and Konstan,
2000; Herlockeret al., 2000; Sinha and Swearingen, 2002).
The idea of CF achieved further success when integrated with Latent
Factor Models (LFM) introduced by Koren (2008) in the late 2000s.
Among the many LFMs, Matrix Factorization (MF) and its variants
were especially successful in rating prediction tasks (Korenet al., 2009).
Latent factor models have been leading the research and application
of recommender systems for many years. However, though successful
in recommendation performance, the “latent factors” in LFMs do not
possess intuitive meanings, which makes it diﬃcult to understand why
an item got good predictions or why it got recommended out of other
candidates. This lack of model explainability also makes it challenging
to provide intuitive explanations to users, since it is hardly acceptable
to tell users that we recommend an item only because it gets higher
prediction scores by the model.
To make recommendation models better understandable, researchers
have gradually turned toExplainable Recommendation Systems, where
the recommendation algorithm not only outputs a recommendation
list, but also explanations for the recommendations by working in
an explainable way. For example, Zhanget al. (2014a) deﬁned the
explainable recommendationproblem, and proposed an Explicit Factor
1.3. Classiﬁcation of the Methods 7
Model (EFM) by aligning the latent dimensions with explicit features
for explainable recommendation. More approaches were also proposed
to address the explainability problem, which we will introduce in detail
in the survey. It is worthwhile noting that deep learning (DL) models
for personalized recommendation have emerged in recent years. We
acknowledgethatwhetherDLmodelstrulyimprovetherecommendation
performance is controversial (Dacremaet al., 2019), but this problem
is out of the scope of this survey. In this survey, we will focus on the
problem that the black-box nature of deep models brings diﬃculty in
model explainability. We will review the research eﬀorts on explainable
recommendation over deep models.
In a broader sense, the explainability of AI systems was already a
core discussion in the 1980s era of “old” or logical AI research, when
knowledge-based systems predicted (or diagnosed) well but could not
explain why. For example, the work of Clancy showed that being able
to explain predictions requires far more knowledge than just making
correct predictions (Clancey, 1982). The recent boom in big data and
computational power have brought AI performance to a new level,
but researchers in the broader AI community have again realized the
importance ofExplainable AI in recent years (Gunning, 2017), which
aims to address a wide range of AI explainability problems in deep
learning, computer vision, autonomous driving systems, and natural
language processing tasks. As an essential branch of AI research, this
also highlights the importance of the IR/RecSys community to address
the explainability issues of various search and recommendation systems.
Moreover, explainable recommendation has also become a very suitable
problem setting to develop newExplainable Machine Learningtheories
and algorithms.
1.3 Classiﬁcation of the Methods
In this survey, we provide a classiﬁcation taxonomy of existing explain-
able recommendation methods, which can help readers to understand
the state-of-the-art of explainable recommendation research.
Speciﬁcally, we classify existing explainable recommendation re-
search with two orthogonal dimensions: 1) The information source or
8 Introduction
display style of the explanations (e.g., textual sentence explanation, or
visual explanation), which represents the human-computer interaction
(HCI) perspective of explainable recommendation research, and 2) the
model to generate such explanations, which represents the machine
learning (ML) perspective of explainable recommendation research.
Potential explainable models include the nearest-neighbor, matrix fac-
torization, topic modeling, graph models, deep learning, knowledge
reasoning, association rule mining, and others.
With this taxonomy, each combination of the two dimensions refers
to a particular sub-direction of explainable recommendation research.
We should note that there could exist conceptual diﬀerences between
“how explanations are presented (display style)” and “the type of infor-
mation used for explanations (information source)”. In the context of
explainable recommendation, however, these two principles are closely
related to each other because the type of information usually determines
how the explanations can be displayed. As a result, we merge these
two principles into a single classiﬁcation dimension. Note that among
the possibly many classiﬁcation taxonomies, this is just one that we
think would be appropriate to organize the research on explainable
recommendation, because it considers both HCI and ML perspectives
of explainable recommendation research.
Table 1.1 shows how representative explainable recommendation
research is classiﬁed into diﬀerent categories. For example, the Explicit
Factor Model (EFM) for explainable recommendation (Zhanget al.,
2014a) developed a matrix factorization method for explainable recom-
mendation,whichprovidesanexplanationsentencefortherecommended
item. As a result, it falls into the category of “matrix factorization with
textual explanation”. The Interpretable Convolutional Neural Network
approach (Seoet al., 2017), on the other hand, develops a deep con-
volutional neural network model and displays item features to users
as explanations, which falls into the category of “deep learning with
user/item feature explanation”. Another example is visually explainable
recommendation (Chenet al., 2019b), which proposes a deep model to
generate image regional-of-interest explanations, and it belongs to the
“deep learning with visual explanation” category. We also classify other
1.3. Classiﬁcation of the Methods 9
T able 1.1: A classiﬁcation of existing explainable recommendation methods. The classiﬁcation is based on two dimensions,
i.e., the type of model for explainable recommendation (e.g., matrix factorization, topic modeling, deep learning, etc.) and the
information/style of the generated explanation (e.g., textual sentence explanation, etc.). Note that due to the table space this is
an incomplete enumeration of the existing explainable recommendation methods, and more methods are introduced in detail in
the following parts of the survey. Besides, some of the table cells are empty because to the best of our knowledge there has not
been a work falling into the corresponding combination
Methods for Explainable Recommendation
Information/
style of the
explanations
Neighbor-
based
Matrix
factorization
Topic
modeling
Graph-
based
Deep
learning
Knowledge-
based
Rule
mining
Post-
hoc
Relevant user or
item
Herlocker
et al. ,
2000
Abdollahi
and
Nasraoui,
2017
Heckel
et al. ,
2017
Chen
et al. ,
2018c
Catherine
et al. ,
2017
Peake
and Wang
2018
Cheng
et al. ,
2019a
User or item
features
Vig et al. ,
2009
Zhang
et al. ,
2014a
McAuley
and
Leskovec,
2013
He et al. ,
2015
Seo et al. ,
2017
Huang
et al. ,
2018
Davidson
et al. ,
2010
McInerney
et al. ,
2018
Textual sentence
explanation
Zhang
et al. ,
2014a
Li et al. ,
2017
Ai et al. ,
2018
Balog
et al. ,
2019
Wang
et al. ,
2018d
Visual
explanation
Chen
et al. ,
2019b
Social
explanation
Sharma
and
Cosley,
2013
Ren et al. ,
2017
Park
et al. ,
2018
Word cluster Zhang,
2015
Wu and
Ester
2015
10 Introduction
research according to this taxonomy, so that readers can understand the
relationship between existing explainable recommendation methods.
Due to the large body of related work, Table 1.1 is only an incomplete
enumeration of explainable recommendation methods. For each “model
– information” combination, we present one representative work in the
corresponding table cell. However, in Sections 2 and 3 of the survey, we
will introduce the details of many explainable recommendation methods.
1.4 Explainability and Eﬀectiveness
Explainability and eﬀectiveness could sometimes be conﬂicting goals
in model design that we have to trade-oﬀ (Ricciet al., 2011), i.e., we
can either choose a simple model for better explainability, or choose
a complex model for better accuracy while sacriﬁcing the explainabil-
ity. While recent evidence also suggests that these two goals may not
necessarily conﬂict with each other when designing recommendation
models (Bilgicet al., 2004; Zhanget al., 2014a). For example, state-of-
the-art techniques – such as the deep representation learning approaches
– can help us to design recommendation models that are both eﬀective
and explainable. Developing explainable deep models is also an attrac-
tive direction in the broader AI community, leading to progress not
only in explainable recommendation research, but also in fundamental
explainable machine learning problems.
When introducing each explainable recommendation model in the
following sections, we will also discuss the relationship between explain-
ability and eﬀectiveness in personalized recommendations.
1.5 Explainability and Interpretability
Explainability and interpretability are closely related concepts in the
literature. In general, interpretability is one of the approaches to achieve
explainability. More speciﬁcally, Explainable AI (XAI) aims to develop
models that can explain their (or other model’s) decisions for system
designers or normal users. To achieve the goal, the model can be either
interpretable or non-interpretable. For example, interpretable models
(such as interpretable machine learning) try to develop models whose
1.6. How to Read the Survey 11
decisionmechanismislocallyorgloballytransparent,andinthisway,the
model outputs are usually naturally explainable. Prominent examples of
interpretablemodelsincludemanylinearmodelssuchaslinearregression
and tree-based models such as decision trees. Meanwhile, interpretability
is not the only way to achieve explainability, e.g., some models can reveal
their internal decision mechanism for explanation purpose with complex
explanation techniques, such as neural attention mechanisms, natural
language explanations, and many post-hoc explanation models, which
are widely used in information retrieval, natural language processing,
computer vision, graph analysis, and many other tasks. Researchers and
practitioners may design and select appropriate explanation methods
to achieve explainable AI for diﬀerent tasks.
1.6 How to Read the Survey
Potential readers of the survey include both researchers and practi-
tioners interested in explainable recommendation systems. Readers
are encouraged to prepare with basic understandings of recommender
systems, such as content-based recommendation (Pazzani and Billsus,
2007), collaborative ﬁltering (Ekstrandet al., 2011), and evaluation of
recommender systems (Shani and Gunawardana, 2011). It is also beneﬁ-
cial to read other related surveys such as explanations in recommender
systems from a user study perspective (Tintarev and Masthoﬀ, 2007a),
interpretable machine learning (Lipton, 2018; Molnar, 2019), as well as
explainable AI in general (Gunning, 2017; Sameket al., 2017).
The following part of the survey will be organized as follows.
In Section 2 we will review explainable recommendation from a user-
interaction perspective. Speciﬁcally, we will discuss diﬀerent information
sources that can facilitate explainable recommendation, and diﬀerent
display styles of recommendation explanation, which are closely related
with the corresponding information source. Section 3 will focus on a
machine learning perspective of explainable recommendation, which
will introduce diﬀerent types of models for explainable recommendation.
Section 4 will introduce evaluation protocols for explainable recommen-
dation, while Section 5 introduces how explainable recommendation
12 Introduction
methods are used in diﬀerent real-world recommender system applica-
tions. In Section 6 we will summarize the survey with several important
open problems and future directions of explainable recommendation
research.
2
Information Source for Explanations
In the previous section, we adopted a two-dimensional taxonomy to
classify existing explainable recommendation research. In this section,
we focus on the ﬁrst dimension, i.e., the information source (or display
style) of recommendation explanations. The second dimension (mod-
els/techniques for explainable recommendation) will be discussed in the
next section.
An explanation is a piece of information displayed to users, explain-
ing why a particular item is recommended. Recommendation expla-
nations can be generated from diﬀerent information sources and be
presented in diﬀerent display styles (Tintarev and Masthoﬀ, 2015), e.g.,
a relevant user or item, a radar chart, a sentence, an image, or a set of
reasoning rules. Besides, there could exist many diﬀerent explanations
for the same recommendation.
For example, Zhanget al.(2014a) generated (personalized) textual
sentences as explanations to help users understand each recommen-
dation; Wu and Ester (2015), Zhang (2015), and Al-Taie and Kadry
(2014) provided topical word clouds to highlight the key features of
a recommended item; Chenet al.(2019b) proposed visually explain-
able recommendations, where certain regions of a product image are
13
14 Information Source for Explanations
highlighted as the visual explanations; Sharma and Cosley (2013) and
Quijano-Sanchez et al. (2017) generated a list of social friends who
also liked the recommended product as social explanations. In early
research stages, Herlockeret al.(2000), Bilgic and Mooney (2005), and
Tintarev and Masthoﬀ (2007b) and McSherry (2005) adopted statisti-
cal histograms or pie charts as explanations to help users understand
the rating distribution and the pros/cons of a recommendation. Du
et al.(2019) provided a visual analytics approach to explainable recom-
mendation for event sequences. Figure 2.1 shows several representative
recommendation explanations.
In this section, we provide a summary of the diﬀerent types of
recommendation explanations to help readers understand what an
explanation can look like in real-world settings. We also categorize the
related work according to diﬀerent explanation styles. More speciﬁcally,
the following subsections present an overview of several frequently seen
explanations in existing systems.
2.1 Relevant User or Item Explanation
We start from the very early stages of recommendation explanation
research. In this section, we introduce explainable recommendation
based on user- and item-based collaborative ﬁltering (Cleger-Tamayo
et al., 2012; Resnicket al., 1994; Sarwaret al., 2001; Zanker and Ninaus,
2010) – two fundamental methods for personalized recommendation.
Extensions of the two basic methods will also be introduced in this
section.
User-based and item-based explanations are usually provided based
on users’ implicit or explicit feedback. In user-based collaborative ﬁl-
tering (Resnicket al., 1994), we ﬁrst ﬁnd a set of similar users (i.e.,
neighbors) for the target user. Once the algorithm recommends an item
to the target user, the explanation is that the user is similar to a group
of “neighborhood” users, and these neighborhood users made good
ratings on the recommended item. For example, Herlockeret al.(2000)
compared the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent display styles for explanations in
user-based collaborative ﬁltering. In this research, explanations can be
displayed as an aggregated histogram of the neighbors’ ratings, or be
2.1. Relevant User or Item Explanation 15
Figure 2.1: Diﬀerent types of recommendation explanations. On the left panel, there
are four example users, together with their purchased items and the corresponding
reviews or ratings. On the right panel, we show some diﬀerent display styles of the
explanations, which are generated based on diﬀerent information sources.
displayed as the detailed ratings of the neighbors, as shown in Figure 2.2.
Recent model-based explainable recommendation approaches can gener-
ate more personalized and meticulously designed explanations than this,
but this research illustrated the basic ideas of providing explanations in
recommender systems.
In item-based collaborative ﬁltering (Sarwaret al., 2001), explana-
tions can be provided by telling the user that the recommended item is
similar to some other items the user liked before, as shown in the left
panel of Figure 2.3, where several highly rated movies by the user (4 or
5 stars) are shown as explanations. More intuitively, as in Figure 2.1,
16 Information Source for Explanations
Figure 2.2: An example of explanations based on relevant users. (a) A histogram
of the neighbors’ ratings are displayed as an explanation for the recommended
item, where the positive and negative ratings are correspondingly clustered, and
the neutral ratings are displayed separately. Based on this explanation, a user can
easily understand that the item is recommended because his/her neighbors made
high ratings on the item. (b) An explanation for the movie “The Sixth Sense”, where
each bar represents the rating of a neighbor, and thex-axis represents a neighbor’s
similarity to the user. With this explanation, it would be easy to understand how a
user’s most similar neighbors rated the target movie (Herlockeret al., 2000).
Figure 2.3: A comparison between relevant-item explanation (left) and relevant-user
explanation (right) (Abdollahi and Nasraoui, 2017).
for the recommended item (i.e., the camera lens), a relevant-user expla-
nation tells Bob that similar users William and Fred also bought this
item, while a relevant-item explanation persuades Bob to buy the lens
by showing the camera he already bought before.
To study how explanations help in recommender systems, Tintarev
(2007) developed a prototype system to study the eﬀect of diﬀerent
types of explanations, especially the relevant-user and relevant-item
explanations. In particular, the author proposed seven beneﬁts of provid-
ing recommendation explanations, including transparency, scrutability,
trustworthiness, eﬀectiveness, persuasiveness, eﬃciency, and satisfaction.
2.2. Feature-based Explanation 17
Based on their user study, the author showed that providing appropriate
explanations can indeed beneﬁt the recommender system over these
seven perspectives.
Usually, relevant-item explanations are more intuitive for users to
understand because users are familiar with the items they interacted
before. As a result, these items can serve as credible explanations for
users. Relevant-user explanations, however, could be less convincing
because the target user may know nothing about other “similar” users
at all, which may decrease the trustworthiness of the explanations
(Herlocker et al., 2000). Besides, disclosing other users’ information
may also cause privacy problems in commercial systems. This problem
drives relevant-user explanation into a new direction, which leverages
social friend information to provide social explanations (Renet al., 2017;
Tsai and Brusilovsky, 2018). For example, we can show a user with her
friends’ public interest as explanations for our social recommendations.
In the following, we will review this research direction in the social
explanation section (Section 2.6).
2.2 Feature-based Explanation
The feature-based explanation is closely related to content-based rec-
ommendation methods. In content-based recommendation, the system
provides recommendations by matching the user proﬁle with the content
features of candidate items (Crameret al., 2008; Ferwerdaet al., 2012;
Pazzani and Billsus, 2007). Content-based recommendations are usually
intuitive to explain based on the features.
Depending on the application scenario, content-based recommenda-
tions can be generated from diﬀerent item features. For example, movie
recommendations can be generated based on movie genres, actors, or
directors; while book recommendations can be provided based on book
types, price, or authors. A conventional paradigm for feature-based
explanation is to show users with the features that match the user’s
proﬁle.
Vig et al.(2009) adopted movie tags as features to generate recom-
mendations and explanations, as shown in Figure 2.4. To explain the
recommended movie, the system displays the movie features and tells
18 Information Source for Explanations
Figure 2.4: Tagsplanation: generating explanations based on content features such
as tags (Viget al., 2009). (a) The basic idea of tags-based recommendation is to
ﬁnd the tags that a user likes, and then recommend items that match these tags.
(b) The tagsplanations for a recommended movieRushmore, where the relevant tags
(features) are displayed as explanations.
Figure 2.5: Using radar charts to explain a recommendation. The left ﬁgure shows
hotel recommendations for a user, where item 1 is recommended because it satisﬁes
the user preferences on almost all aspects. Similarly, the right ﬁgure shows video
game recommendations, and also, item 1 is recommended (Houet al., 2018).
the user why each feature is relevant to her. The authors also designed
a user study and showed that providing feature-based explanations can
help to improve the eﬀectiveness of recommendations. Furthermore,
Ferwerdaet al.(2012) conducted a user study, and the results supported
the idea that explanations are highly correlated with user trust and
satisfaction in the recommendations.
Content features can be displayed in many diﬀerent explanation
styles. For example, Houet al.(2018) used radar charts to explain why
2.3. Opinion-based Explanation 19
an item is recommended and why others are not. As shown in Figure 2.5,
a recommendation is explained in that most of its aspects satisfy the
preference of the target user.
User demographic information describes the content features of users,
and the demographic features can also be used to generate feature-based
explanations. Demographic-based recommendation (Pazzani, 1999) is
one of the earliest approaches to personalized recommendation systems.
Recently, researchers have also integrated demographic methods into
social media to provide product recommendations in social environments
(Zhao et al., 2014, 2016).
The demographic-based approach makes recommendations based on
user demographic features such as age, gender, and residence location.
Intuitively, an item recommended based on demographic information
can be explained by the demographic feature(s) that triggered the
recommendation, e.g., by telling the user that “80% of customers in
your age bought this product”. Zhaoet al.(2014) represented products
and users in the same demographic feature space, and used the weights
of the features learned by a ranking function to explain the results;
Zhao et al.(2016) further explored demographic information in social
media environment for product recommendation with feature-based
explanations.
2.3 Opinion-based Explanation
More and more user-generated contents have been accumulating on the
Web, such as e-commerce reviews and social media posts, which help
users to express their opinion on certain items or aspects. Researchers
have shown that such information is quite beneﬁcial in user proﬁling
and recommendation (McAuley and Leskovec, 2013; Zhenget al., 2017).
Besides, it helps to generate ﬁner-grained and more reliable explanations,
which beneﬁt users to make more informed decisions (Liet al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2014a). With this motivation, many models have been
proposed to explain recommendations based on user-generated texts.
Methods in this direction can be broadly classiﬁed into aspect-level
and sentence-level approaches, according to how the explanations are
displayed. See Figure 2.1 for example, where aspect-level models present
20 Information Source for Explanations
item aspects (such as color, quality) and their scores as explanations,
while the sentence-level models directly present an explanation sentence
to users about why the camera lens is recommended. We will focus on
aspect-level explanation in this subsection, while sentence-level explana-
tions will be introduced in the following subsection together with other
natural language generation-based explanation models.
The aspect-level explanation is similar to feature-based explanation,
except that aspects are usually not directly available in an item or user
proﬁle. Instead, they are extracted or learned as part of the recommen-
dation model from – e.g., the reviews – and the aspects can be paired
up with consumer opinions to express a clear sentiment on the aspect.
Researchers in the sentiment analysis community have explored
both data mining and machine learning techniques for aspect-level
sentiment analysis, which aims to extract aspect-sentiment pairs from
text. For example, Hu and Liu (2004) proposed a frequent feature
mining approach to aspect-level sentiment analysis, and Luet al.(2011)
proposedanoptimizationapproachtoconstructcontext-awaresentiment
lexicons automatically. A comprehensive review on sentiment analysis
and opinion mining is summarized in Liu (2012). Based on these research
eﬀorts, Zhanget al.(2014b) developed a phrase-level sentiment analysis
toolkit namedSentires1 to extract “aspect–opinion–sentiment” triplets
from reviews of a product domain. For example, given large-scale user
reviews about mobile phones, the toolkit can extract triplets such
as “noise–high–negative”, “screen–clear–positive”, and “battery_life–
long–positive”. The toolkit can also detect the contextual sentiment of
the opinion words under diﬀerent aspect words. For example, though
“noise” paired with “high” usually represents a negative sentiment, when
“quality” is paired with “high”, however, it instead shows a positive
sentiment. Based on the dictionary of aspect–opinion–sentiment triplets
constructed by the program, it can further detect which triplets are
contained in a review sentence.
Based on this toolkit, researchers developed diﬀerent models for ex-
plainable recommendation. For example, Zhanget al.(2014a) proposed
an explicit factor model for explainable recommendation, which presents
1http://yongfeng.me/software/
2.4. Sentence Explanation 21
Figure 2.6: Word cloud explanation for hotel recommendations generated based on
latent topic modeling with textual reviews. (a) Word cloud about theLocationof
the recommended hotel, and (b) word cloud about theService of the recommended
hotel. Courtesy image from Wu and Ester (2015).
aspect-opinion word clouds as explanations, such as “bathroom–clean”,
to highlight the performance of the recommended item on certain as-
pects. Wu and Ester (2015) developed a topic modeling approach for
explainable hotel recommendations on TripAdvisor, which generates
topical word cloud explanations on three hotel features (Location, Ser-
vice, and Room), as shown in Figure 2.6. The word size in the word
cloud is proportional to the sentiment opinion of the aspect. Renet al.
(2017) proposed a social collaborative viewpoint regression (sCVR)
model for predicting item ratings based on user opinions and social
relations, which provides viewpoints as explanations, where a viewpoint
refers to a topic with a speciﬁc sentiment label. Combined with trusted
user relations, it helps users to understand their friends’ opinion about
a particular item. Wanget al.(2018b) developed a multi-task learning
solution for explainable recommendation, where two companion learning
tasks of user preference modeling for recommendation and opinionated
content modeling for explanation are integrated via a joint tensor fac-
torization framework. We will introduce more about the model details
in the explainable recommendation model section (Section 3).
2.4 Sentence Explanation
Sentence-level approach provides explanation sentences to users. This
approach can be further classiﬁed into template-based approach and
generation-based approach.
22 Information Source for Explanations
Figure 2.7: Generating sentence explanations with template-based methods.
Template-based approach ﬁrst deﬁnes some explanation sentence
templates, and then ﬁlls the templates with diﬀerent words to per-
sonalize them for diﬀerent users. For example, Zhanget al. (2014a)
constructed explanations by telling the user thatYou might be inter-
ested in feature, on which this product performs well. In this template,
the feature will be selected based on personalization algorithms to
construct a personalized explanation, as shown in Figure 2.7. Based on
the templates, the model can also provide “dis-recommendations” to
let the user know why an item is not a good ﬁt, by telling the userYou
might be interested infeature, on which this product performs poorly.
Based on user studies, it shows that providing both recommendation
and dis-recommendation explanations improve the persuasiveness and
conversion rate of recommender systems.
Wang et al.(2018b) provided template-based explanations based
on both feature and opinion words, for example, an explanation for
Yelp restaurant recommendation could beIts decor is [neat] [good]
[nice]. Its sandwich is [grilled] [cajun] [vegan] . Its sauce is
[good] [green] [sweet] , where words in brackets are opinion words
selected by the model to describe the corresponding item feature.
Taoet al.(2019a) further integrated regression trees to guide the
learning of latent factor models, and used the learnt tree structure
to explain the recommendations. They added predeﬁned modiﬁers in
front of the selected features to construct template-based explanations,
such asWe recommend this item to you because its[good/excellent]
[feature] matches with your[emphasize/taste] on [feature].
Gao et al.(2019) proposed an explainable deep multi-view learning
framework to model multi-level features for explanation. They also
adopted feature-based templates to provide explanations, and the fea-
tures are organized in an industry-level hierarchy named Microsoft
2.4. Sentence Explanation 23
Figure 2.8: Generating sentence explanations based on natural language generation
models such as LSTM (Costaet al., 2018; Liet al., 2017).
Concept Graph. The model improves accuracy and explainability si-
multaneously, and is capable of providing highly usable explanations
in commercial systems. Technical details of the above models will be
introduced in the explainable recommendation model section.
Based on natural language generation techniques, we can also gener-
ate explanation sentences directly without using templates. For example,
Costa et al.(2018) generated explanation sentences based on long-short
term memory (LSTM). By training over large-scale user reviews, the
model can generate reasonable review sentences as explanations, as
shown in Figure 2.8. Inspired by how people explain word-of-mouth
recommendations, Chang et al. (2016) proposed a process to com-
bine crowdsourcing and computation to generate personalized natural
language explanations. The authors also evaluated the generated ex-
planations in terms of eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness, trust, and satisfaction.
Li et al. (2017) leveraged gated recurrent units (GRU) to generate
tips for a recommended restaurant in Yelp. According to the predicted
ratings, the model can control the sentiment attitude of the generated
tips, which help users understand the key features of the recommended
items. Luet al.(2018b) proposed a multi-task recommendation model,
which jointly learns to perform rating prediction and recommendation
explanation. The explanation module employs an adversarial sequence
to sequence learning technique to encode, generate, and discriminate
the user and item reviews. Once trained, the generator can be used to
generate explanation sentences.
24 Information Source for Explanations
A lot of explanation generation approaches rely on user reviews as
the training corpus to train an explanation generation model. However,
user reviews are noisy, because not all of the sentences in a review
are explanations or justiﬁcations of the users’ decision-making process.
Motivated by this problem, Chenet al.(2019a) proposed a hierarchical
sequence-to-sequence model (HSS) for personalized explanation genera-
tion, which includes an auto-denoising mechanism that selects sentences
containing item features for model training. Niet al.(2019) introduced
new datasets and methods to address this recommendation justiﬁcation
task. In terms of data, the authors proposed an extractive approach
to identify review segments that justify users’ intentions. In terms of
generation, the authors proposed a reference-based Seq2Seq model with
aspect-planning to generate explanations covering diﬀerent aspects. The
authors also proposed an aspect-conditional masked language model
to generate diverse justiﬁcations based on templates extracted from
justiﬁcation histories.
2.5 Visual Explanation
To leverage the intuition of visual images, researchers have tried to
utilize item images for explainable recommendation. In Figure 2.1, for
example, to explain to Bob that the lens is recommended because of its
collar appearance, the system highlights the image region corresponding
to the necklet of the lens.
Lin et al. (2019) studied the explainable outﬁt recommendation
problem, for example, given a top, how to recommend a list of bottoms
(e.g., trousers or skirts) that best match the top from a candidate col-
lection, and meanwhile generate explanations for each recommendation.
Technically, this work proposed a convolutional neural network with a
mutual attention mechanism to extract visual features of the outﬁts, and
the visual features are fed into a neural prediction network to predict the
rating scores for the recommendations. During the prediction procedure,
the attention mechanism will learn the importance of diﬀerent image
regions, which tell us which regions of the image are taking eﬀect when
generating the recommendations, as shown in Figure 2.9(a).
2.5. Visual Explanation 25
(a) Explainable outfit recommendation (b) Visually explainable recommendation
Figure 2.9: (a) Explainable outﬁt recommendation by Linet al. (2019). The authors
adopted a convolutional neural network with mutual attention to learn the importance
of each pixel, and the importance scores tell us which pixels of the image take eﬀect
when generating the recommendations. (b) User interest on images are personalized:
diﬀerent users may care about diﬀerent regions each for the sam image.
Figure 2.10: Examples of the visual explanations in Chenet al. (2019b). Each
row represents a recommended item. The ﬁrst column lists the image of the item,
and the second column shows the user’s review on the item. The last two columns
compare the region-of-interest explanations provided by two visually explainable
recommendation models. In the review column, the bolded italic text shows how the
review corresponds to the visual explanation.
Chen et al.(2019b) proposedvisually explainable recommendation
based on personalized region-of-interest highlights, as shown in Fig-
ure 2.10. The basic idea is that diﬀerent regions of the product image
may attract diﬀerent users. As shown by the example in Figure 2.9(b),
even for the same shirt, some users may care about the collar design
while others may pay attention to the pocket. As a result, the authors
adopted a neural attention mechanism integrated with both image and
review information to learn the importance of each region of an image.
The important image regions are highlighted in a personalized way as
visual explanations for users.
26 Information Source for Explanations
(a) “You both know” (b) “Others also liked”
Figure 2.11: Social explanations on Facebook. (a) Facebook provides friends in
common as explanations when recommending a new friend to a user (Papadimitriou
et al., 2012). (b) Showing friends who liked the same item when recommending items
to a user (Sharma and Cosley, 2013).
In general, the research on visually explainable recommendation
is still at its initial stage. With the continuous advancement of deep
image processing techniques, we expect that images will be better
integrated into recommender systems for both better performance and
explainability.
2.6 Social Explanation
As discussed in the previous subsections, a problem of relevant-user
explanations is trustworthiness and privacy concerns, because the target
user may have no idea about other users who have “similar interests”.
Usually, it will be more acceptable if we tell the user that his/her friends
have similar interests in the recommended item. As a result, researchers
proposed to generate social explanations, that is, explanations with the
help of social information.
Papadimitriou et al.(2012) studied human-style, item-style, feature-
style, and hybrid-style explanations in social recommender systems; they
also studied geo-social explanations to combine geographical data with
social data. For example, Facebook provides friends in common as expla-
nations when recommending a new friend to a user (see Figure 2.11(b)).
Sharma and Cosley (2013) studied the eﬀects of social explanations
2.6. Social Explanation 27
Figure 2.12: Explanations based on similar users, where similar users can be social
friends or users that have the same preference on the same subset of products (Park
et al., 2018).
in music recommendation by providing the target user with the num-
ber of friends that liked the recommended item (see Figure 2.11(b)).
The authors found that explanations inﬂuence the likelihood of users
checking out the recommended artists, but there is little correlation
between the likelihood and the actual rating for the artist. Chaneyet al.
(2015) presented social Poisson factorization, a Bayesian model that
incorporates a user’s preference with her friends’ latent inﬂuence, which
provides explainable serendipity to users, i.e., pleasant surprise due to
novelty.
Except for friend recommendation, social explanations also take
eﬀect in other social network scenarios. For example, Parket al.(2018)
proposed a uniﬁed graph structure to exploit both rating and social
information to generate explainable product recommendations. In this
framework, a recommendation can be explained based on the target
user’s friends who have similar preferences, as shown in Figure 2.12.
Quijano-Sanchez et al.(2017) introduced a social explanation system
applied to group recommendation, which signiﬁcantly increased the
likelihood of the user acceptance, the user satisfaction, and the system
eﬃciency to help users make decisions. Wanget al.(2014) generates
social explanations such as “A and B also like the item”. They proposed
to ﬁnd an optimal set of users as the most persuasive social explanation.
Speciﬁcally, a two-phase ranking algorithm is proposed, where the ﬁrst
phase predicts the persuasiveness score of a single candidate user, and
the second phrase predicts the persuasiveness score of a set of users
28 Information Source for Explanations
based on the predicted persuasiveness of the individual users, by taking
the marginal net utility of persuasiveness, credibility of the explanation
and reading cost into consideration.
2.7 Summary
In this section, we introduced several styles of recommendation expla-
nations, including: 1) Explanations based on relevant users or items,
which present nearest-neighbor users or items as an explanation. They
are closely related to the critical idea behind user-based or item-based
collaborative ﬁltering methods. 2) Feature-based explanation, which
provides users with the item features that match the target user’s
interest proﬁle. This approach is closely related to content-based recom-
mendation methods. 3) Opinion-based explanation, which aggregates
users’ collective opinions in user generated contents as explanations.
4) Textual sentence explanation, which provides the target users with
explanation sentences. The sentence could be constructed based on
pre-deﬁned templates or directly generated based on natural language
generation models. 5) Visual explanations, which provide users with
image-based explanations. The visual explanation could be a whole im-
age or a region-of-interest highlight in the image. 6) Social explanations,
which provide explanations based on the target user’s social relations.
They help to improve user trust in recommendations and explanations.
It should be noted that while 1 to 3 are usually bonded with certain
types of recommendation algorithms, 4 to 6 focus more on how the
explanations are shown to users, which are not necessarily generated
by one particular type of algorithm. In the following section, we will
introduce more details of diﬀerent explainable recommendation models.
3
Explainable Recommendation Models
In the previous section, we have seen diﬀerent types of explanations in
recommender systems. Our next step is to describe how such explana-
tions can be generated.
Explainable recommendation research can consider the explainability
of either the recommendation methods or the recommendation results.
When considering the explainability of methods, explainable recommen-
dation aims to devise interpretable models for increased transparency,
and such models usually directly lead to the explainability of results.
In this section, many of the factorization-based, topic modeling, graph-
based, deep learning, knowledge-based, and rule mining approaches
adopt this research philosophy – they aim to design intrinsic explainable
models and understand how the recommendation process works.
Another philosophy for explainable recommendation research is that
we only focus on the explainability of the recommendation results. In
this way, we treat the recommendation model as a blackbox, and develop
separate models to explain the recommendation results produced by
this blackbox. In this section, the post-hoc/model-agnostic approach
adopts this philosophy.
29
30 Explainable Recommendation Models
In the following, we ﬁrst provide a very brief overview of machine
learning for general recommender systems, so as to provide readers with
necessary background knowledge. Then we provide a comprehensive
survey on explainable recommendation models.
3.1 Overview of Machine Learning for Recommendation
Recent research on model-based explainable recommendation is closely
related to machine learning for recommender systems. We ﬁrst provide
a brief overview of machine learning for personalized recommendations
in this section. One of the classical ML models for recommendation is
Latent Factor Model (LFM), based on Matrix Factorization (MF). It
learns latent factors to predict the missing ratings in a user-item rating
matrix. Representative matrix factorization methods include Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) (Koren, 2008; Korenet al., 2009; Srebro
and Jaakkola, 2003), Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) (Lee
and Seung, 1999, 2001), Max-Margin Matrix Factorization (MMMF)
(Rennie and Srebro, 2005; Srebroet al., 2005), Probabilistic Matrix
Factorization (PMF) (Mnih and Salakhutdinov, 2008; Salakhutdinov
and Mnih, 2008), and Localized Matrix Factorization (LMF) (Zhang
et al., 2013a,b). Matrix factorization methods are also commonly referred
to as point-wise prediction, and they are frequently used to predict user
explicit feedbacks, such as numerical ratings in e-commerce or movie
review websites.
Pair-wise learning to rank is frequently used to learn the correct item
rankings based on implicit feedback. For example, Rendleet al.(2009)
proposed Bayesian Personalized Ranking (BPR) to learn the relative
ranking of the purchased items (positive item) against unpurchased
items (negative items). Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme (2010) further
extended the idea to tensor factorization to model pairwise interactions.
Except for pair-wise learning to rank, Shiet al.(2010) adopted list-wise
learning to rank for collaborative ﬁltering.
Deeplearningandrepresentationlearningalsogainedmuchattention
in recommendation research. For example, Chenget al.(2016) proposed
WideandDeepNetwork,whichcombinesshallowregressionandmultiple
layer neural network for recommender systems. Deep Neural Network
3.2. Factorization Models for Explainable Recommendation 31
is also applied in real-world commercial systems such as the YouTube
recommender system (Covington et al., 2016). Besides, researchers
also explored various deep architectures and information modalities
for recommendation, such as convolutional neural networks over text
(Zheng et al., 2017) or images (Chenet al., 2019b), recurrent neural
networks over user behavior sequence (Hidasiet al., 2016), auto-encoders
(Wuet al., 2016), and memory networks (Chenet al., 2018c).
Though many publications are generated in this direction due to the
recentpopularityofdeeplearning,weacknowledgethatitiscontroversial
whether neural models really make progress in recommender system
research (Dacremaet al., 2019). Deep models work when suﬃcient data
is available for training, such as side information or knowledge graphs
in some research datasets or in the industry environment (Zhanget al.,
2019). Nevertheless, recommendation performance is not a key focus of
this survey. Instead, we will focus on the explainability perspective of
deep models. A lot of deep models have been developed for explainable
recommendation, which we will introduce in the following subsections.
3.2 Factorization Models for Explainable Recommendation
In this section, we introduce how matrix/tensor-factorization and fac-
torization machines are used for explainable recommendation.
A lot of explainable recommendation models have been proposed
based on matrix factorization methods. One common problem of matrix
factorization methods – or more generally, latent factor models – is that
the user/item embedding dimensions are latent. Usually, we assume
that the user and item representation vectors are embedded in a low-
dimensional space, where each dimension represents a particular factor
that aﬀects user decisions. However, we do not explicitly know the exact
meaning of each factor, which makes the predictions or recommendations
challenging to explain.
To solve the problem, Zhanget al.(2014a) proposed Explicit Factor
Models (EFM). The basic idea is to recommend products that perform
well on the user’s favorite features, as shown in Figure 3.1. Speciﬁcally,
the proposed approach extracts explicit product features from user re-
views, and then aligns each latent dimension of matrix factorization with
32 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.1: Overview of the Explicit Factor Model. (a) The basic idea is to recom-
mend products that perform well on the user’s favorite features. (b) Each review
(shaded block) is transformed into a set of product features accompanied by the
user sentiment on the feature. (c) User attentions on diﬀerent features constitute the
user-feature attention matrixX, item qualities on features constitute the item-quality
matrix Y, and these two matrices are collaborated to predict the rating matrixA.
(d) The explicit product features can be used to generate personalized explanations.
an explicit feature, so that the factorization and prediction procedures
are trackable to provide explicit explanations. The proposed approach
can provide personalized recommendation explanations based on the
explicit features, e.g., “The product is recommended because you are
interested in a particular feature, and this product performs well on the
feature”. The model can even provide dis-recommendations by telling
the user that “The product does not perform very well on a feature
that you care about”, which helps to improve the trustworthiness of
recommendation systems. Because user preferences on item features
are dynamic and may change over time, Zhanget al.(2015b) extended
the idea by modeling the user’s favorite features dynamically on daily
resolution.
Chen et al. (2016) further extended the EFM model to tensor
factorization. In particular, the authors extracted product features
from textual reviews and constructed the user-item-feature cube. Based
3.2. Factorization Models for Explainable Recommendation 33
(a) Learning to rank features (b) Explainable multi-task learning
Figure 3.2: (a) Learning to rank features for explainable recommendation over
multiple categories based on tensor factorization (Chenet al., 2016). (b) User-feature-
opinion tensor and item-feature-opinion tensor in explainable multi-task learning.
Feature-level text-based explanation is generated by integrating these two tensors
for a given user-item-feature tuple (Wanget al., 2018b).
on this cube, the authors conducted pair-wise learning to rank to
predict user preferences on features and items, which helps to provide
personalized recommendations. The model was further extended to
consider multiple product categories simultaneously, which helps to
alleviate the data sparsity problem, as shown in Figure 3.2(a).
Wanget al.(2018b) further generalized MF-based explainable rec-
ommendation by multi-task learning over tensors. In particular, two
companionlearningtasks“userpreferencemodelingforrecommendation”
and “opinionated content modeling for explanation” are integrated via
a joint tensor factorization framework, as shown in Figure 3.2(b). The
algorithm predicts not only a user’s preference over a list of items (i.e.,
recommendations), but also how the user would appreciate a particular
item at the feature level (i.e., opinionated textual explanation).
User preference distribution over the features could be diﬀerent on
diﬀerent items, while the above methods assume each user has a global
feature preference distribution. As an improvement, Chenet al.(2018b)
propose an Attention-driven Factor Model (AFM), which learns and
tunes the user attention distribution over features on diﬀerent items.
Meanwhile, users’ attention distributions can also serve as explanations
for recommendations.
To analyze the relationship between inputs (user history) and out-
puts (recommendations) in latent factor models, Chenget al.(2019a)
34 Explainable Recommendation Models
adopted inﬂuence analysis in LFMs towards explainable recommenda-
tion. In particular, the authors incorporate interpretability into LFMs
by tracing each prediction back to the model’s training data, and further
provide intuitive neighbor-style explanations for the predictions. We
will provide more details of this work in the following section speciﬁcally
devoted to model-agnostic and post-hoc explainable recommendation.
The features extracted from reviews can also be recommended to
users as explanations. Baumanet al.(2017) proposed the Sentiment
Utility Logistic Model (SULM), which extracts features (i.e., aspects)
and user sentiments on these features. The features and sentiments are
integrated into a matrix factorization model to regress the unknown rat-
ings, which are ﬁnally used to generate recommendations. The proposed
method provides not only item recommendations, but also feature rec-
ommendations for each items as explanations. For example, the method
can recommend restaurants together with the most important aspects
that the users can select, such as the time to go to a restaurant (e.g.,
lunch or dinner), and dishes to order (e.g., seafood). Qiuet al.(2016)
and Houet al.(2018) also investigated aspect-based latent factor models
for recommendation by integrating ratings and reviews.
Latent factor models can also be integrated with other structured
data for better recommendation and explainability, such as tree struc-
tures or graph structures. Taoet al.(2019a) proposed to tame latent
factor models for explainability with factorization trees. The authors
integrate regression trees to guide the learning of latent factor models
for recommendation, and use the learned tree structure to explain the
resulting latent factors. In particular, the authors build regression trees
on users and items with user-generated reviews, and associate a latent
proﬁle to each node on the trees to represent users and items. With the
growth of the regression tree, the latent factors are reﬁned under the
regularization imposed by the tree structure. As a result, we can track
the creation of latent proﬁles by looking into the path of each factor on
regression trees, which thus serves as an explanation for the resulting
recommendations.
Researchers also investigated model-based approaches to generate
relevant-user or relevant-item explanations, which provide explainable
3.3. Topic Modeling for Explainable Recommendation 35
Figure 3.3: (a) Explainable recommendation with external data. (b) Explainable
recommendation without external data support (Abdollahi and Nasraoui, 2016).
recommendations solely based on the user-item rating matrix (see Fig-
ure 3.3). Speciﬁcally, Abdollahi and Nasraoui (2016, 2017) described Ex-
plainable Matrix Factorization (EMF) for explainable recommendation.
This model generates relevant-user explanations, where a recommended
item is explained asmany users similar to you purchased this item. To
achieve this goal, the authors added an explainability regularizer into
the objective function of matrix factorization. The explainability regu-
larizer forces the user latent vector and item latent vector to be close
to each other if a lot of the user’s neighbors also purchased the item. In
this way, the model naturally selects those commonly purchased items
from a user’s neighbors as recommendations, and meanwhile maintains
high rating prediction accuracy. Liuet al.(2019) extended the idea by
considering the fact that ratings in the user-item interaction matrix are
missing not at random. The authors proposed an explainable proba-
bilistic factorization model, which employs an inﬂuence mechanism to
evaluate the importance of the users’ historical data, so that the most
related users and items can be selected to explain each predicted rating.
Based on the learned inﬂuence scores, ﬁve representative user/item
groups can be identiﬁed from data, includinginﬂuential users, impres-
sionable users, independent users, popular items, andlong-tail items,
which can be used to generate explanations such aswe recommendx
because an inﬂuential useru liked the popular itemx.
3.3 Topic Modeling for Explainable Recommendation
Based on available text information – especially the widely available
textual reviews in e-commerce – topic modeling approach has also been
widely adopted for explanations in recommender systems. In these
36 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.4: (a) Framework for understanding users and items based on ratings and
reviews in the Rating-Boosted Latent Topics model. Users and items are embedded
as recommendability vectors in the same space. They are further used by latent factor
models for rating prediction and top-n recommendation (Tanet al., 2016). (b) An
example of trusted social relations, user reviews and ratings in a recommender system.
Black arrows connect users with trusted social relations. “ThumpUp” symbols reﬂect
the ratings of items. Concepts and topics have been highlighted in red and blue,
respectively. Three viewpoints are represented in three diﬀerent colors. A viewpoint
is a mixture over a concept, a topic, and a sentiment (Renet al., 2017).
approaches, users can usually be provided with intuitive explanations in
the form of topical word clouds (McAuley and Leskovec, 2013; Wu and
Ester, 2015; Zhaoet al., 2015). In this section, we review the related
work that can be categorized into this approach.
McAuley and Leskovec (2013) proposed to understand the hidden
factors in latent factor models based on the hidden topics learned
from reviews. The authors proposed the Hidden Factor and Topic
(HFT) model, which bridges latent factor models and Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA). It links each dimension of the latent vector with a
dimension of the LDA topic distribution vector. By considering reviews,
the method improves rating prediction accuracy. Besides, by projecting
each user’s latent vector into the latent topic space in LDA, it helps to
understand why a user made a particular rating on a target item. For
example, we can detect the most signiﬁcant topics that a user likes.
Following this idea, Tanet al.(2016) proposed to model item recom-
mendability and user preference in a uniﬁed semantic space, as shown
in Figure 3.4(a). In this model, each item is embedded as a topical
recommendability distribution vector. Similarly, each user is embedded
in the same topical recommendability space based on his/her historical
3.3. Topic Modeling for Explainable Recommendation 37
Figure 3.5: (a) The FLAME model learns each user’s sentiments on diﬀerent item
aspects. (b) Show explanations as word clouds where the aspect size is proportional
to its sentiment (Wu and Ester, 2015).
ratings. The recommendability and preference distributions are, at last,
integrated into a latent factorization framework to ﬁt the ground truth.
In this model, recommendation explanations can be derived by showing
the topic words that have the most signiﬁcant recommendability score.
Cheng et al.(2019b) attempted to enrich topic models based on multi-
modality information. In particular, the authors proposed a multi-modal
aspect-aware topic modeling approach based on textual reviews and
item images. The model learns user preferences and item features from
diﬀerent aspects, and also estimates the aspect importance of a user
toward an item to provide explainable recommendations.
More generally, researchers also investigated other probabilistic
graphic models beyond LDA for explainable recommendations. Wu and
Ester (2015) studied the personalized sentiment estimation problem on
item aspects. In particular, the authors proposed the FLAME model
(Factorized Latent Aspect ModEl), which combines the advantages of
collaborative ﬁltering and aspect-based opinion mining. It learns each
user’s personalized preferences on diﬀerent item aspects based on her
reviews, as shown in Figure 3.5(a). Based on this, it predicts the user’s
aspect ratings on new items through collective intelligence. The proposed
method showed improved performance on hotel recommendations on
TripAdvisor. Further, for each hotel recommendation, it can provide
a word cloud of the hotel aspects as an explanation, as shown in
38 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.5(b), where the size of each aspect is proportional to the
sentiment of the aspect.
Zhao et al.(2015) designed a probabilistic graphical model to inte-
grate sentiment, aspect, and region information in a uniﬁed framework
for improved recommendation performance and explainability in point-
of-interest (POI) recommendation. The explanations are determined
by each user’s topical-aspect preference, which is similar to the topical
clusters in McAuley and Leskovec (2013), but the diﬀerence is that the
model can provide sentiment of each cluster for explanation purposes.
Ren et al. (2017) leveraged topic modeling for social explainable
recommendations. Speciﬁcally, the authors proposed social-collaborative
viewpoint regression (sCVR). A “viewpoint” is deﬁned as a tuple of
concept, topic, and sentiment label from both user reviews and trusted
social relations, as shown in Figure 3.4(b), and the viewpoints are used
as explanations. The authors proposed a probabilistic graphical model
based on the viewpoints to improve prediction accuracy. Similar to the
previous work, explanations are generated based on the user’s favorite
topics embedded in the viewpoints.
3.4 Graph-based Models for Explainable Recommendation
Many user-user or user-item relationships can be represented as graphs,
especially in social network scenarios. In this section, we introduce
how explainable recommendations can be generated based on graph
learning approaches such as graph-based propagation and clustering.
He et al.(2015) introduced a tripartite graph structure to model the
user-item-aspect ternary relations for top-N recommendation, as shown
in Figure 3.6, where an aspect is an item feature extracted from user
reviews. The authors proposed TriRank, a generic algorithm for ranking
the vertices in the tripartite graph, which applies smoothness and ﬁtting
constraints for node ranking and personalized recommendation. In this
survey, explanations are attributed to the top-ranked aspects that match
the target user and the recommended item.
Without using external information such as aspects, Heckelet al.
(2017) conducted over-lapping co-clustering based on user-item bipartite
graph for explainable recommendation. In each co-cluster, the users
3.4. Graph-based Models for Explainable Recommendation 39
Figure 3.6: (a) An example tripartite structure of the TriRank algorithm. (b) A
mock interface for showing the explanations of recommendationChick-Fil-A to a
user (He et al., 2015).
Figure 3.7: (a) Example of the overlapping user-item co-clusters identiﬁed by the
OCuLaR algorithm (Heckelet al., 2017). Colored elements are positive examples,
and the white elements within the clusters are recommendations. (b) Based on the
clustering results, the algorithm provides user-based and item-based explanations.
For example, customers with history also purchased the recommended item.
have similar interests, and the items have similar properties, as shown
in Figure 3.7. Explanations are generated based on users’ collaborative
information, for example, in the form of “Item A is recommended to
Client X with conﬁdenceα, because Client X has purchased Item B,
C, and D, while clients with similar purchase history (such as Clients
Y and Z) also bought Item A”. If a user-item pair falls into multiple
co-clusters, we can thus generate multiple user-based and item-based
explanations from each of the co-cluster.
40 Explainable Recommendation Models
Wang et al.(2018c) proposed a tree-enhanced embedding model for
explainable recommendation to combine the generalization ability of
embedding-based models and the explainability of tree-based models.
In this model, the authors ﬁrst employed a tree-based model to learn
explicit decision rules. The decision rules are based on cross features
extracted from side information. Then, the authors designed an embed-
ding model that incorporates explicit cross features, and generalize to
unseen user or item cross features based on collaborative learning. To
generate explanations, an attention network is used to detect the most
signiﬁcant decision rules during the recommendation process.
Graph-based explainable recommendation is also frequently used in
social recommendation scenarios, because social network is naturally
a graph structure. For example, the UniWalk algorithm (Parket al.,
2018) introduced in Section 2 is a graph-based explainable recommen-
dation algorithm. It exploits both ratings and the social network to
generate explainable product recommendations. In this algorithm, a
recommendation can be explained based on the target user’s friends
who have similar preferences on the graph.
3.5 Deep Learning for Explainable Recommendation
Recently, researchers have leveraged deep learning and representation
learning for explainable recommendations. The deep explainable rec-
ommendation models cover a wide range of deep learning techniques,
including CNN (Seoet al., 2017; Tang and Wang, 2018), RNN/LSTM
(Donkers et al., 2017), attention mechanism (Chenet al., 2018a), mem-
ory networks (Chenet al., 2018c; Taoet al., 2019b), capsule networks
(Li et al., 2019), and many others. They are also applied to diﬀerent
explainable recommendation tasks, such as rating prediction, top-n
recommendation, and sequential recommendation. Based on natural
language generation models, the system can even automatically generate
explanation sentences instead of using explanation templates (Chen
et al., 2019a; Liet al., 2017; Seoet al., 2017). In this section, we will
review deep learning approaches to explainable recommendation.
Seo et al. (2017) proposed to model user preferences and item
properties using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) upon review
3.5. Deep Learning for Explainable Recommendation 41
Figure 3.8: (a) The dual-attention architecture to extract user and item represen-
tations. A user document and an item document are fed into the user network (left)
and item network (right). (b) The model generates attention scores for each review
and highlights the high attention words as explanations (Seoet al., 2017).
text. It leans dual local and global attentions for explanation purposes,
as shown in Figure 3.8. When predicting the user-item rating, the
model selectively chooses review words with diﬀerent attention weights.
Based on the learned attention weights, the model can show which part
of the review is more important for the output. Besides, the model can
highlight the important words in the review as explanations to help
users understand the recommendations.
Similarly, Wuet al.(2019) combined the user-item interaction and
review information in a uniﬁed framework. The user reviews are at-
tentively summarized as content features, which are further integrated
with the user and item embeddings to predict the ﬁnal ratings. Luet al.
(2018a) presented a deep learning recommendation model that co-learns
user and item information from ratings and reviews. It jointly optimizes
a matrix factorization component (over ratings) and an attention-based
GRU network (over reviews), so that features learned from ratings and
reviews are aligned with each other. Luet al.(2018b) further added a
review discriminator based on adversarial sequence to sequence learning
into the joint optimization framework, so that the generator can generate
reviews for a user-recommendation pair as natural language explanation.
In both (Wuet al., 2019) and (Luet al., 2018a), the attention weights
over review words are leveraged to explain the recommendations.
42 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.9: (a) Automatically generated textual reviews (explanations) based on
natural language generation. Setting diﬀerent model parameters will generate diﬀerent
explanations (Costa et al., 2018). (b) Example natural language explanations for the
movie “Gravity”. Depending on the model of a user’s interest, the system selects one
crowd-sourced explanation for the user (Changet al., 2016).
Gao et al.(2019) developed a Deep Explicit Attentive Multi-view
Learning Model (DEAML) for explainable recommendation, which aims
to mitigate the trade-oﬀ between accuracy and explainability by de-
veloping explainable deep models. The basic idea is to build an initial
network based on an explainable deep hierarchy (e.g., the Microsoft
Concept Graph), and improve the model accuracy by optimizing key
variables in the hierarchy (e.g., node importance and relevance). The
model outputs feature-level explanations similar to Zhanget al.(2014a),
but the features are attentively retrieved from an explicit feature hier-
archy. The model is capable of modeling multi-level explicit features
from noisy and sparse data, and shows highly usable explanations in
industry-level applications. Instead of using existing features, Maet al.
(2019a) proposed to automatically learn disentangled features from data
for recommendation, which not only improved the explainability but
also enable users to better control the recommendation results.
Diﬀerent from highlighting the review words as explanations, Costa
et al. (2018) proposed a method for automatically generating natu-
ral language explanations based on character-level RNN. The model
concatenates the user ratings into the input component as auxiliary
information, so that the model can generate reviews according to the
3.5. Deep Learning for Explainable Recommendation 43
expected rating (sentiment). Diﬀerent from many explainable recom-
mendation models, whose explanation is generated based on predeﬁned
templates, the model can automatically generate explanations in a
natural language manner. By choosing diﬀerent parameters, the model
can generate diﬀerent explanations to attract users, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.9(a). Liet al.(2017) proposed a more comprehensive model to
generate tips in review systems, where each tip is a short summarization
sentence for a long review. The tips also serve as recommendation expla-
nations. Chenet al.(2019a) integrated the natural language generation
approach and the feature word approach, and proposed a topic sensitive
generation model to generate explanations about particular feature
words. To some extent, the model can control the item aspect that the
generated explanation talks about. Inspired by human’s information-
processing model in cognitive psychology, Chenet al.(2019d) developed
an encoder-selector-decoder architecture for explainable recommenda-
tion, which exploits the correlations between the recommendation task
and the explanation task through co-attentive multi-task learning. The
model enhances the accuracy of the recommendation task, and generates
linguistic explanations that are ﬂuent, useful, and highly personalized.
Chang et al.(2016) proposed another approach to generating natural
language explanations, which is based on human users and crowdsourc-
ing. The authors argued that algorithm generated explanations can
be overly simplistic and unconvincing, while humans can overcome
these limitations. Inspired by how people explain word-of-mouth recom-
mendations, the authors designed a process to combine crowdsourcing
and computation for generating explanations. They ﬁrst extract the
topical aspects of movies based on an unsupervised learning approach,
and then, generate natural language explanations for the topical as-
pects. More speciﬁcally, the authors collect relevant review quotes for
each aspect, and then ask crowd workers to synthesize the quotes into
explanations. Finally, the authors model users’ preferences based on
their activities and present explanations in a personalized fashion (Fig-
ure 3.9(b)). Controlled experiments with 220 MovieLens users were
conducted to evaluate the eﬃciency, eﬀectiveness, trust, and satisfaction
of the personalized natural language explanations, in comparison with
personalized tag-based explanations.
44 Explainable Recommendation Models
Instead of generating explanations, Chenet al.(2018a) selects appro-
priate user reviews as explanations. The authors designed an attention
mechanism over the user and item reviews for rating prediction. In
this research, the authors believe that reviews written by others are
critical reference information for a user to make decisions in e-commerce.
However, the huge amount of reviews for each product makes it diﬃcult
for consumers to examine all the reviews to evaluate a product. As a re-
sult, selecting and providing high-quality reviews for each product is an
important approach to generate explanations. Speciﬁcally, the authors
introduced an attention mechanism to learn the usefulness of reviews.
Therefore, highly-useful reviews can be adopted as explanations, which
help users to make faster and better decisions.
Chen et al.(2019b) proposed visually explainable recommendation
by jointly modeling visual images and textual reviews. It highlights
the image region-of-interest for a user as recommendation explanations,
as shown in Figure 2.10. By jointly modeling images and reviews, the
proposed model can also generate a natural language explanation to
accompany the visual explanations by describing the highlighted regions.
With the natural language explanations, users can better understand
why the particular image regions are highlighted as visual explanations.
With the advantage of reasoning over explicit memory slots, mem-
ory networks have been explored in explainable recommendation tasks.
For example, Chenet al. (2018c) studied explainable sequential rec-
ommendation based on memory networks. It considers each item in a
user’s interaction history as a memory slot, and develops an attention
mechanism over the slots to predict the subsequent user behaviors.
Explanations are provided by showing how and which of the user’s
previous item(s) inﬂuenced the current prediction. The authors further
proposed Dynamic Explainable Recommendation (Chenet al., 2019c)
based on time-aware gated recurrent units. Taoet al.(2019b) proposed
a Log2Intent framework for interpretable user modeling. It focuses on
modeling user behaviors, as well as predicting and interpreting user
intents from the unstructured software log-trace data. Technically, the
authors incorporate auxiliary knowledge with memory networks for
sequence to sequence modeling. The attention mechanism produces
attended annotations over memory slots to interpret the user log data.
3.5. Deep Learning for Explainable Recommendation 45
Li et al.(2019) developed a capsule network approach to explainable
recommendation. It considers an “item aspect – user viewpoint” pair as a
logic unit, which is used to reason the user rating behaviors. The model
discovers the logic units from reviews and resolves their sentiments
for explanations. A sentiment capsule architecture with a Routing by
Bi-Agreement mechanism is proposed to identify the informative logic
units for rating prediction, while the informativeness of each unit helps
to produce explanations for the predictions. Developing capsule logic
units for explainable reasoning shows a promising approach towards
explainable recommendation systems.
We should note that the scope and literature of deep learning for
explainable recommendation is not limited to the research introduced in
this subsection. Except for deep learning over text or image for explain-
able recommendations, research eﬀorts in the explainable/interpretable
machine learning area are also reﬂected in explainable recommenda-
tion systems. Though they also belong to deep learning for explainable
recommendations, many of them are better classiﬁed into other explain-
able recommendation approaches such as model-agnostic or post-hoc
methods. We will introduce these methods in the following subsections.
Another important yet less explored question is the ﬁdelity of the
deep explainable models. Deep learning models are usually complex in
nature, and sometimes it could be diﬃcult to decide if the explanations
provided by the model truly reﬂect the real mechanism that gener-
ated the recommendations or decisions. The community has diﬀerent
opinions on the explanation ﬁdelity problem. For example, attention
mechanism is a frequently used technique to design explainable decision
making models. However, Jain and Wallace (2019) argued that standard
attention modules do not provide meaningful explanations and should
not be treated as though they do, while Wiegreﬀe and Pinter (2019)
later challenged many of the assumptions underlying the prior work,
arguing that such a claim depends on one’s deﬁnition of explanation,
and showed that the prior work does not disprove the usefulness of
attention mechanisms for explainability. Overall, the explainability of
deep models is still an important open problem to explore, and more
advanced explanation models are needed to understand the behavior of
46 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.10: (a) The user-item knowledge graph constructed for Amazon product
domain. On the left is a set of triplets of user behaviors and item properties, and
on the right is the corresponding graph structure. The knowledge graph contains
diﬀerent types of relations such aspurchase, mention, also bought, also view, category ,
and brand. (b) Explanation paths between a user Bob and a recommended item
iPad in the product knowledge graph. Bob and iPad can be connected through the
commonly mentioned wordiOS or the common brandApple from Bob’s already
purchased products.
neural networks. We will further discuss this problem in the following
section of evaluating explainable recommendations.
3.6 Knowledge Graph-based Explainable Recommendation
Knowledge graph (KG, or knowledge base) contains rich information
about the users and items, which can help to generate intuitive and more
tailored explanations for the recommended items. Recently, researchers
have been exploring knowledge graphs for explainable recommendations.
Catherine et al. (2017) proposed a method to jointly rank items
and knowledge graph entities using a Personalized PageRank procedure,
which produces recommendations together with their explanations. The
paper works on the movie recommendation scenario. It produces a
ranked list of entities as explanations by jointly ranking them with the
corresponding movies.
Diﬀerent from Catherineet al.(2017) that adopts rules and programs
on KG for explainable recommendations, Aiet al.(2018) proposed to
adopt KG embeddings for explainable recommendation, as shown in
Figure 3.10. The authors constructed a user-item knowledge graph,
3.6. Knowledge Graph-based Explainable Recommendation 47
which contains various user, item, and entity relations, such as “user
purchase item”, and “item belong to category”. KG embeddings are
learned over the graph to obtain the embeddings of each user, item,
entity, and relation. To decide recommendations for a user, the model
ﬁnds the most similar item under thepurchase relation. Besides, ex-
planations can be provided by ﬁnding the shortest path from the user
to the recommended item through the KG. By incorporating explicit
user queries, the model can be further extended to conduct explainable
search over knowledge graphs (Aiet al., 2019).
Wang et al.(2018a) proposed the Ripple Network, an end-to-end
framework to incorporate KG into recommender systems. Similar to
ripples propagating on the surface of the water, the Ripple Network
stimulates the propagation of user preferences over the knowledge
entities. It automatically and iteratively extends a user’s potential
interests through the links in the KG. The multiple “ripples” activated
by a user’s historically clicked items are thus superposed to form the
preference distribution of the user for a candidate item, which can be
used to predict the ﬁnal click probability. Explanations can also be
provided by ﬁnding a path from the user and the recommended item
over the knowledge graph.
Huang et al.(2018) leveraged KG for recommendation with better
explainability in a sequential recommendation setting. The authors
bridged Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) with Key-Value Memory
Networks (KV-MN) for sequential recommendation. The RNN compo-
nent is used to capture a user’s sequential preference on items, while
the memory network component is enhanced with knowledge of items
to capture the users’ attribute-based preferences. Finally, the sequential
preferences, together with the attribute-level preferences, are combined
as the ﬁnal representation of user preference. To explain the recom-
mendations, the model detects those attributes that are taking eﬀect
when predicting the recommended item. For a particular music recom-
mendation as an example, it can detect whether thealbum attribute is
more important or thesinger attribute is more important, where the
attributes come from an external knowledge graph. The model further
enhances the explainability by providing value-level interpretability,
i.e., suppose we already know that some attributes (e.g., album) play
48 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.11: Policy-guided path reasoning for explainable recommendation. The
algorithm aims to learn a policy that navigates from a user to potential items of
interest by interacting with the knowledge graph environment. The trained policy is
then adopted for the path reasoning phase to make recommendations to the user,
while the path serves the explanation for a recommendation (Xianet al., 2019).
a critical role in determining the recommendation, the model further
predicts the importance of diﬀerent values for that attribute. Huang
et al.(2019) further incorporated multi-modality knowledge graph for
explainable sequential recommendation. Diﬀerent from conventional
item-level sequential modeling methods, the proposed method captured
user dynamic preferences on user-item interaction-level by modeling the
sequential interactions over knowledge graphs.
To combine the power of machine learning and inductive rule learn-
ing, Maet al.(2019b) proposed a joint learning framework to integrate
explainable rule induction in KG with a rule-guided neural recommen-
dation model. The framework encourages two modules to complement
each other in generating explainable recommendations. One module is
based on inductive rules mined from item knowledge graphs. The rules
summarize common multi-hop relational patterns for inferring the item
associations, and they provide human-readable explanations for model
prediction. The second module is a recommendation module, which is
augmented by the induced rules. The KG inductive rules are translated
into explanations, which connect the recommended item with the user’s
purchase history.
Real-world knowledge graphs are usually huge. Enumerating all the
paths between a user-item node pair for similarity calculation is usually
computationally prohibitive. To solve the problem, Xianet al.(2019)
proposed a reinforcement reasoning approach over knowledge graphs for
3.7. Rule Mining for Explainable Recommendation 49
explainable recommendations, as shown in Figure 3.11. The key idea is
to train a reinforcement learning agent for pathﬁnding. In the training
stage, the agent starts from a user and is trained to reach the correct
items with high rewards. In the inference stage, the agent will thus
directly walk to correct items for recommendations, without having to
enumerate all the paths between user-item pairs.
Knowledge graphs can also help to explain a blank-box recommen-
dation model. Zhanget al. (2020) proposed a knowledge distillation
approach to explain black-box models for recommendation. The authors
proposed an end-to-end joint learning framework to combine the ad-
vantages of embedding-based recommendation models and path-based
recommendation models. Given an embedding-based model that pro-
duces black-box recommendations, the proposed approach interprets
its recommendation results based on diﬀerentiable paths on knowledge
graphs; the diﬀerentiable paths, on the other hand, regularize the black-
box model with structured information encoded in knowledge graph for
better performance.
3.7 Rule Mining for Explainable Recommendation
Rule mining approaches are essential for recommendation research.
They usually have special advantages for explainable recommendations,
because in many cases, they can generate very straightforward expla-
nations for users. The most frequently used rule mining technique for
explainable recommendation is association rule mining (Agrawalet al.,
1993, 1994). A very classic example is the “beer-diaper” recommendation
originated from data mining research.
For example, Mobasher et al. (2001) leveraged association rule
mining for eﬃcient web page recommendation at large-scale. Choet al.
(2002) combined decision tree and association rule mining for a web-
based shop recommender system. Smythet al.(2005) adopted apriori
association rule mining to help calculate item-item similarities, and
applied association rule mining for the conversational recommendation
task. Sandvig et al. (2007) studied the robustness of collaborative
recommendation algorithms based on association rule mining. Zhang
et al.(2015a) deﬁned a sequence of user demands as a web browsing task,
50 Explainable Recommendation Models
Figure 3.12: A screenshot of the “personalized recommendation” module on the
YouTube home page. The boxed explanations are generated based on association
rule mining (Davidsonet al., 2010).
by analyzing user browsing logs, they leveraged frequent pattern mining
for task-based recommendations. More comprehensively, Amatriain
and Pujol (2015) provided a survey of data mining for personalized
recommendation systems.
In terms of explainable recommendation, Linet al. (2000, 2002)
investigated association rules for recommendation systems. In particular,
the authors proposed a “personalized” association rule mining technique,
which extracts association rules for a target user. The associations
between users and items are employed to make recommendations, which
are usually self-explainable by the association rules that produced them,
for example, “90% of the articles liked by user A and user B are also
liked by user C”.
Davidson et al.(2010) introduced the YouTube Video Recommenda-
tion System. The authors considered the sessions of user watch behaviors
on the site. For a given period (usually 24 hours), the authors adopted
association rule mining to count how often each pair of videos(vi,v j)
were co-watched within the same session, which helps to calculate the
relatedness score for each pair of videos. To provide personalized rec-
ommendations, the authors consider a video seed set for each user,
which includes videos the user watched recently, and videos the user
explicitly favorited, liked, rated, or added to playlists. Related videos
of these seed videos are recommendations, while the seed video, as well
as the association rules that triggered the recommendation, are taken
as explanations, as shown in Figure 3.12.
3.8. Model Agnostic and Post Hoc Explainable Recommendation 51
Recently, Baloget al. (2019) proposed a set-based approach for
transparent, scrutable, and explainable recommendations. Please note
that although we discuss this work in this section of rule mining for ex-
plainable recommendation, the proposed approach is a framework that
can be generalized to machine learning models depending on how item
priors are estimated. The proposed model assumes that user preferences
can be characterized by a set of tags or keywords. These tags may be
provided by users (social tagging) or extracted automatically. Given
explicit ratings of speciﬁc items, it infers set-based preferences by aggre-
gating over items associated with a tag. This set-based user preference
model enables us to generate item recommendations transparently and
provide sentence-level textual explanations. A signiﬁcant advantage of
this explainable recommendation model is that it providesscrutability
by letting users provide feedback on individual sentences. Any change
to the user’s preferences has an immediate impact, thereby endowing
users with more direct control over the recommendations they receive.
3.8 Model Agnostic and Post Hoc Explainable Recommendation
Sometimes the recommendation mechanism may be too complex to ex-
plain. In such cases, we rely on post-hoc or model-agnostic approaches to
explainable the recommendations. In these methods, recommendations
and explanations are generated from diﬀerent models – an explanation
model (independent from the recommendation mechanism) provides
explanations for the recommendation model after the recommendations
have been provided (thus “post-hoc”).
For example, in many e-commerce systems, the items are recom-
mended based on very sophisticated hybrid models, but after an item
is recommended, we can provide some simple statistical information as
explanations, such as “70% of your friends bought this item”. Usually, we
pre-deﬁne several possible explanation templates based on data mining
methods, such as frequent itemset mining and association rule mining,
and then decide which explanation(s) to display based on post-hoc
statistics such as maximum conﬁdence. It should be noted that just
because the explanations are post-hoc does not mean that they are fake,
52 Explainable Recommendation Models
i.e., the statistical explanations should be true information, they are
just decoupled from the recommendation model.
Peake and Wang (2018) provided an association rule mining ap-
proach to post-hoc explainable recommendations. The authors treated
an arbitrary recommendation model – in this paper, a matrix factor-
ization model – as a black box. Given any user, the recommendation
model takes the user history as input and outputs the recommendations.
The input and output constitute a transaction, and transactions of all
users are used to extract association rules. The association rules can
then be used to explain the recommendations produced by the black-box
model – if an item recommended by the black-box model can also be
recommended out of the association rules, we thus say that this item
is explainable by the rules, such as “{X ⇒Y }: Because you watched
X, we recommend Y”. The authors also adoptedﬁdelity to evaluate the
post-hoc explanation model, which shows what percentage of items can
be explained by the explanation model.
Singh and Anand (2018) studied the post-hoc explanations of
learning-to-rank algorithms in terms of web search. In this work, the au-
thors focused on understanding the ranker decisions in a model agnostic
manner, and the rankings explainability is based on an interpretable
feature space. Technically, the authors ﬁrst train a blackbox ranker,
and then use the ranking labels produced by the ranker as secondary
training data to train an explainable tree-based model. The tree-based
model is the post-hoc explanation model to generate explanations for
the ranking list. In this sense, Peake and Wang (2018) can be considered
as a point-wise post-hoc explanation model, while Singh and Anand
(2018) is a pair-wise post-hoc explanation model.
In general machine learning context, a prominent idea of model-
agnostic explanation is using simple models to approximate a complex
model around a sample, so that the simple models help to understand
the complex model locally. For example, Ribeiroet al.(2016) proposed
LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanation), which adopts
sparse linear models to approximate a complex (non-linear) classiﬁer
around a sample, and the linear model can thus explain to us which
feature(s) of the sample contributed to its predicted label. Singh and
Anand (2019) extended the idea to explore the local explainability
3.8. Model Agnostic and Post Hoc Explainable Recommendation 53
Figure 3.13: A reinforcement learning framework for generating recommendation ex-
planations. The coupled agents learn to select the explanations that best approximate
the predictions made by the recommendation model (Wanget al., 2018d).
of ranking models. In particular, the authors converted the ranking
problem over query-document pairs into a binary classiﬁcation problem
over relevant/irrelevant classes, and employed the LIME framework to
explain the ranking model using linear SVM models. Coeﬃcients of the
linear model thus explain to us which words of a document are strong
indicators of relevance.
McInerney et al.(2018) developed a bandit approach to explainable
recommendation. The authors proposed that users would respond to
explanations diﬀerently and dynamically, and thus, a bandit-based
approach for exploitation-exploration trade-oﬀ would help to ﬁnd the
best explanation orderings for each user. In particular, they proposed
methods to jointly learn which explanations each user responds to, which
are the best contents to recommend for each user, and how to balance
explorationwithexploitationtodealwithuncertainty.Experimentsshow
that explanations aﬀect the way users respond to recommendations, and
the proposed method outperforms the best static explanations ordering.
This work shows that just as exploitation-exploration is beneﬁcial to
recommendation tasks, it is also beneﬁcial to explanation tasks.
Wanget al.(2018d) proposed a model-agnostic reinforcement learn-
ing framework to generate sentence explanations for any recommenda-
tion model (Figure 3.13). In this design, the recommendation model
to be explained is a part of the environment, while the agents are re-
sponsible for generating explanations and predicting the output ratings
of the recommendation model based on the explanations. The agents
treat the recommendation model as a black box (model-agnostic) and
54 Explainable Recommendation Models
interact with the environment. The environment rewards the agents if
they can correctly predict the output ratings of the recommendation
model (model-explainability). Based on some prior knowledge about
desirable explanations (e.g., the desirable length), the environment also
rewards the agents if the explanations have good presentation quality
(explanation quality control). The agents learn to generate explanations
with good explainability and presentation quality by optimizing the
expected reward of their actions. In this way, the recommendation model
reinforces the explanation model towards better post-hoc explanations.
Cheng et al.(2019a) contributed mathematical understandings to
post-hoc explainable recommendations based on inﬂuence analysis.
Inﬂuence functions, which stem from robust statistics, have been used to
understand the eﬀect of training points on the predictions of black-box
models. Inspired by this, the authors propose an explanation method
named FIA (Fast Inﬂuence Analysis), which helps to understand the
prediction of trained latent factor models by tracing back to the training
data with inﬂuence functions. They presented how to employ inﬂuence
functions to measure the impact of historical user-item interactions on
the prediction results of LFMs, and provided intuitive neighbor-style
explanations based on the most inﬂuential interactions.
Overall, post-hoc explainable recommendation approaches attempt
to develop an explanation model to explain a black-box prediction model.
Though the explanations may not strictly follow the exact mechanism
that produced the recommendations (i.e., explanation ﬁdelity may be
limited), they have advantages in the ﬂexibility to be applied in many
diﬀerent recommendation models.
3.9 Summary
In this section, we introduced diﬀerent machine learning models for
explainable recommendations. We ﬁrst provided an overview of machine
learning for recommender systems, and then, we focused on diﬀerent
types of explainable recommendation methods, including matrix/tensor-
factorization approaches, topic modeling approaches, graph-based ap-
proaches, deep learning approaches, knowledge-based approaches, rule
mining approaches, and post-hoc/model-agnostic approaches.
3.9. Summary 55
Explainable recommendation research can consider the explainabil-
ity of either the recommendation methods or the recommendation
results, corresponding to model-intrinsic and model-agnostic approaches
(Lipton, 2018). It is interesting to see that both modeling philosophies
have their roots in human cognitive science (Miller, 2019). Sometimes,
human-beings make decisions based on careful logical reasoning, so
they can clearly explain how a decision is made by showing the rea-
soning process step by step (Lipton, 2018). In this case, the decision
model is transparent and the explanations can be naturally provided.
Other times, people make intuition decisions ﬁrst, and then “seek” an
explanation for the decision, which belongs to the post-hoc explanation
approach (Miller, 2019). It is diﬃcult to say which research philosophy
towards explainable recommendation – and explainable AI in a broader
sense – is the correct approach (maybe both). Answering this question
requires signiﬁcant breakthroughs in human cognitive science and our
understanding about how the human brain works.
4
Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation
In this section, we provide a review of the evaluation methods for
explainable recommendations. It would be desirable if an explainable
recommendation model can achieve comparable or even better recom-
mendation performance than conventional “non-explainable” methods,
and meanwhile, achieve better explainability.
To evaluate the recommendation performance, we can adopt the
same measures as evaluating conventional recommendation algorithms.
For rating prediction tasks, we can use mean absolute error (MAE)
or root mean square error (RMSE), while for top-n recommendation,
we can adopt standard ranking measures such as precision, recall, F-
measure, and normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG). We
can also conduct online evaluations with real users based on online
measures such as click-through rate (CTR) and conversion rate, which
are frequently used to evaluate ranking performance.
In this section, we mainly focus on the evaluation of explanations.
Similarly, explanations can also be evaluated both online and oﬄine.
Usually, oﬄine evaluation is easier to implement, since online evaluation
and user studies would depend on the availability of data and users
in real-world systems, which are not always accessible to researchers.
56
4.1. User Study 57
As a result, online evaluation is encouraged but not always required for
explainable recommendation research.
4.1 User Study
A straightforward approach to evaluating explanations is through user
study based on volunteers or paid experiment subjects. The volunteers
or paid subjects can either be directly recruited by the researchers or
through online crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical
Turk1 and CrowdFlower.2 Usually, the study will design some questions
or tasks for the subjects to answer or complete, and conclusions will be
derived from the responses of the subjects (Kitturet al., 2008).
For example, Herlockeret al. (2000) studied the eﬀectiveness of
diﬀerent explanation styles in user-based collaborative ﬁltering. In this
research, the study was performed as a survey, and study participants
were presented with the following hypothetical situation:
Imagine that you have $7 and a free evening coming up. You
areconsideringgoingtothetheatertoseeamovie,butonlyif
thereisamovieworthseeing.Todetermineifthereisamovie
worthseeing,youconsultMovieLensforapersonalizedmovie
recommendation. MovieLens recommends one movie, and
provides some justiﬁcation.
Each participant was then provided with 21 individual movie recom-
mendations, each with a diﬀerent explanation component (see Figure 2.2
for two examples), and asked to rate on a scale of one to seven how likely
they would be to go and see the movie. The subject’s average responses
on each explanation are thus calculated to evaluate the eﬀectiveness
the explanation.
Vig et al.(2009) conducted a user study for four explanation inter-
faces based on the MovieLens website, as shown in Figure 4.1. Subjects
complete an online survey, in which they evaluate each interface about
how well it helps them to: 1) understand why an item is recommended
1https://www.mturk.com
2https://www.crowdfower.com
58 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation
Figure 4.1: Some explanation interfaces for online user study in Viget al. (2009).
(a) RelSort interface: Shows relevance and preference, and sorts tags by relevance.
(b) PrefSort interface: Shows relevance and preference, and sorts tags by preference.
(justiﬁcation), 2) decide if they like the recommended item (eﬀective-
ness), and 3) determine if the recommended item matches their mood
(mood compatibility). The survey responses help the authors to conclude
the role of tag preference and tag relevance in promoting justiﬁcation,
eﬀectiveness, and mood compatibility.
User study is also used to evaluate recent machine learning ap-
proaches to explainable recommendation. For example, Wanget al.
(2018b) recruited participants through Amazon Mechanical Turk to
evaluate with a diverse population of users. The study is based on the
review data in Amazon and Yelp datasets. For each participant, the
authors randomly selected a user from the dataset, and showed this
user’s reviews to the participant, so that the participant can get familiar
with the user. Participants are then asked to infer the user’s prefer-
ence based on these reviews. Then they will be asked to evaluate the
recommendations and explanations provided to the user by answering
several survey questions from this user’s perspective. Except for textual
explanations, user study is also used to evaluate visual explanations,
for example, Chenet al.(2019b) generated visual explanations by high-
lighting image region-of-interest to users, and leveraged Amazon MTurk
to hire freelancers to label the ground-truth images for evaluation.
Besides large-scale online workers, we may also conduct user studies
with relative small-scale volunteers, paid subjects, or manually labeling
the explanations. For example, Wang and Benbasat (2007) adopted a
4.2. Online Evaluation 59
survey-based user study approach to investigate the trust and under-
standability of content-based explanations. They examined the eﬀects
of three explanation types – how, why, and trade-oﬀ explanations – on
consumers’ trusting beliefs in competence, benevolence, and integrity.
The authors built a recommendation system experimental platform,
and results conﬁrmed the critical role of explanation in enhancing con-
sumers’ initial trusting beliefs. Renet al.(2017) took a random sample
of 100 recommendations, and manually evaluated their explanations
regarding the accuracy of sentiment labels, which helped to verify that
the proposed viewpoint-based explanations are more informative than
topic labels in prior work.
4.2 Online Evaluation
Another approach to evaluating explainable recommendation is through
online experiments. There could be several diﬀerent perspectives to con-
sider, including persuasiveness, eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency, and satisfaction
of the explanations.
Due to the limited type of information that one can collect in on-
line systems, it is usually easier to evaluate the persuasiveness of the
explanations, i.e., to see if the explanations can help to make users
accept the recommendations. For example, Zhanget al.(2014a) con-
ducted online experiments focusing on how the explanations aﬀect user
acceptance. The authors conducted A/B-tests based on a commercial
web browser, which has more than 100 million users, with 26% monthly
active users. The experiments recommend compatible phones when a
user is browsing mobile phones in an online shopping website, as shown
in Figure 4.2. To evaluate the explanation persuasiveness, three user
groups are designed, including an experimental group that receives the
testing explanations, a comparison group that receives the baseline
“People also viewed” explanations, and a control group that receives no
explanation. The click-through rate of each group is calculated to evalu-
ate the eﬀect of providing personalized explanations. Besides, they also
calculated the percentage of recommendations added to cart by users
to evaluate the conversation rate, and the percentage of agreements to
evaluate the explanation eﬀectiveness, where a recommendation (or a
60 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation
Figure 4.2: Top-4 recommended items are presented by the browser at the right-
hand side when the user is browsing an online product. A feature-opinion word cloud
is also displayed to assist explanations. For example, the biggest pair in the right
ﬁgure means “PictureClarity-High”. Explanations are displayed only when the user
hovers the mouse on a recommended item. In this way, the system knows that the
user indeed examines the explanation.
dis-recommendation) is considered as an agreement if it was (or was
not) added to cart, respectively.
We should note that the evaluation measures in online scenarios
could vary depending on the availability of the resources in the testing
environment. For example, one may evaluate based on click-through-
rate (CTR) when user click information is available, or calculate the
purchase rate if user purchase actions can be tracked, or even calculate
the gross proﬁt if product price information is available.
Online evaluation and user study may be concurrently performed,
i.e., sometimes user study can be performed in online platforms, however,
they also have signiﬁcant diﬀerences regardless the operating platform.
User study usually asks participants to complete certain questions or
tasks under given experimental instructions, as a result, participants
usually know that they are being investigated. Online evaluation such
as A/B testing, on the other hand, usually exposures selected users
in the experimental environment unconsciously, and then collects user
behaviors therein to study and compare the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent
strategies. Both approaches have pros and cons, e.g., due to the ﬂexibility
of questions to ask, user study enables researchers to design complex
surveys to analyze the problem at hand in depth, while in online
evaluation, researchers have to make comparisons based on a few certain
4.3. Oﬄine Evaluation 61
types of user behaviors. On the other hand, the fact that participants
know their being experimented in user study may bring cognitive bias
to the results, as a result, a lot of research eﬀorts have been made to
reduce the bias in user studies (Arnott, 2006).
4.3 Oﬄine Evaluation
In general, there are two approaches to evaluating recommendation
explanations oﬄine. One is to evaluate the percentage of recommen-
dations that can be explained by the explanation model, regardless of
the explanation quality; and the second approach is to evaluate the
explanation quality directly. However, we have to note that more oﬄine
evaluation measures/protocols are yet to be proposed for comprehensive
explainability evaluation.
For the ﬁrst approach, Abdollahi and Nasraoui (2017) adopted
mean explainability precision (MEP) and mean explainability recall
(MER). More speciﬁcally, explainability precision (EP) is deﬁned as
the proportion of explainable items in the top-n recommendation list,
relative to the total number of recommended (top-n) items for each
user. Explainability recall (ER), on the other hand, is the proportion of
explainable items in the top-n recommendation list, relative to the total
number of explainable items for a given user. Finally, mean explainability
precision (MEP) and mean explainability recall (MER) are EP and ER
averaged across all testing users, respectively. Peake and Wang (2018)
further generalized the idea and proposed modelFidelity as a measure
to evaluate explainable recommendation algorithms, which is deﬁned as
the percentage of explainable items in the recommended items:
Model Fidelity = |explainable items∩recommended items|
|recommended items|
For the second approach, evaluating the quality of the explanations
usually depends on the type of explanations. One commonly used ex-
planation type is a piece of explanation sentence. In this case, oﬄine
evaluation can be conducted with text-based measures. For example,
in many online review websites (such as e-commerce), we can consider
a user’s true review for an item as the ground-truth explanation for
62 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation
the user to purchase the item. If our explanation is a textual sentence,
we can take frequently used text generation measures for evaluation,
such as BLEU score (bilingual evaluation understudy, Papineniet al.,
2002) and ROUGE score (recall-oriented understudy for gisting eval-
uation, Lin, 2004). The explanation quality can also be evaluated in
terms of readability measures, such as Gunning Fog Index (Gunning,
1952), Flesch Reading Ease (Flesch, 1948), Flesch Kincaid Grade Level
(Kincaid et al., 1975), Automated Readability Index (Senter and Smith,
1967), and Smog Index (Mc Laughlin, 1969).
Overall, regardless of the explanation style (text or image or others),
oﬄine explanation quality evaluation would be easy if we have (small
scale) ground-truth explanations. In this way, we can evaluate how well
the generated explanations match with the ground-truth, in terms of
precision, recall, and their variants.
4.4 Qualitative Evaluation by Case Study
Case study as the qualitative analysis is also frequently used for ex-
plainable recommendation research. Providing case studies can help to
understand the intuition behind the explainable recommendation model
and the eﬀectiveness of explanations. Providing case studies as quali-
tative analysis also helps to understand when the proposed approach
works and when it does not work.
For example, Chenet al. (2018c) provided case study to explain
the sequential recommendations, as shown in Figure 4.3. Through
case studies, the authors found that many sequential recommendations
can be explained by “one-to-multiple” or “one-to-one” user behavior
patterns. “One-to-multiple” means that a series of subsequent purchases
are triggered by the same item, while “one-to-one” means that each
of the subsequent purchases is triggered by its preceding item. These
explanations can help users to understand why an item is recommended
and how the recommended items match their already purchased items.
Hou et al.(2018) adopted case studies to analyze the user prefer-
ence, item quality, and explainability of the hotel recommendations.
The authors ﬁrst proposed a metric called Satisfaction Degree on As-
pects (SDA) to measure the user satisfaction on item aspects, and then
4.4. Qualitative Evaluation by Case Study 63
Figure 4.3: Case study of e-commerce user behaviors for explainable sequential
recommendations. Recommendations could be explained by “one-to-multiple” behav-
iors, e.g., a baby crib leads to a mattress protector, a mosquito net, and a bed bell;
recommendations may also be explained by “one-to-one” behaviors, e.g., an infant
formula leads to a feeding bottle, nipples, and a nipple cleaner step by step.
Figure 4.4: Case study of explainable hotel recommendations for a target user. For
each item, the algorithm calculates its quality on each aspect, and for each user, the
algorithm calculates user preference on each aspect. The system then draws a radar
chart and a bar chart of the user preferences and item qualities for explanation.
conducted case studies to show how the model explains the recommen-
dations, as shown in Figure 4.4. In this example, item 1 is recommended
instead of item 2 for the target user. By examining the user preference
and item quality, this recommendation is explained by the fact that
item 1 satisﬁes user preferences over most aspects.
64 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation
4.5 Summary
In this section, we introduced the evaluation methods for explainable
recommendation research. A desirable explainable recommendation
model would not only be able to provide high-quality recommenda-
tions but also high-quality explanations. As a result, an explainable
recommendation model would better be evaluated in terms of both
perspectives.
In this section, we ﬁrst presented frequently used evaluation meth-
ods for recommendation systems, including both online and oﬄine
approaches. We further introduced methods particularly for explanation
evaluation, including both quantitative and qualitative methods. More
speciﬁcally, quantitative methods include online, oﬄine, and user study
approaches, while qualitative evaluation is usually implemented by case
studies over the generated explanations.
5
Explainable Recommendation in Diﬀerent
Applications
The research and application of explainable recommendation methods
span across many diﬀerent scenarios, such as explainable e-commerce
recommendation, explainable social recommendation, and explainable
multimedia recommendation.
In this section, we provide a review of explainable recommendation
methods in diﬀerent applications. Most of the research papers in this
section have already been introduced in previous sections. Instead, we
organize them based on their application scenario to help readers better
understand the current scope of explainable recommendation research
and how it helps in diﬀerent applications.
5.1 Explainable E-commerce Recommendation
Product recommendation in e-commerce is one of the most widely
adopted scenarios for explainable recommendations. It has been a
standard test setting for explainable recommendation research.
As an example of this scenario, Zhang et al. (2014a) proposed
explainable recommendation based on the explicit factor model, and
conducted online experiments to evaluate the explainable recommenda-
tions based on a commercial e-commerce website (JD.com). Later, many
65
66 Explainable Recommendation in Diﬀerent Applications
explainable recommendation models are proposed for e-commerce rec-
ommendation. For instance, Heet al. (2015) introduced a tripartite
graph ranking algorithm for explainable recommendation of electronics
products; Chenet al.(2016) proposed a learning to rank approach to
cross-category explainable recommendation of the products; Seoet al.
(2017) and Wuet al. (2019) conducted explainable recommendation
for multiple product categories in Amazon, and highlighted important
words in user reviews based on attention mechanism; Heckelet al.(2017)
adopted overlapping co-clustering to provide scalable and interpretable
product recommendations; Chen et al. (2019b) proposed a visually
explainable recommendation model to provide visual explanations for
fashion products; Houet al.(2018) used product aspects to conduct
explainable video game recommendation in Amazon; Chenet al.(2018a)
leveraged neural attention regression based on reviews to conduct rating
prediction on three Amazon product categories; Chenet al. (2018c)
adopted memory networks to provide explainable sequential recommen-
dations in Amazon; Wanget al.(2018b) leveraged multi-task learning
with tensor factorization to learn textual explanations for Amazon
product recommendation; By incorporating explicit queries, explainable
recommendation can also be extended to explainable product search in
e-commerce systems (Aiet al., 2019).
Explainable recommendations are essential for e-commerce systems,
not only because it helps to increase the persuasiveness of the recommen-
dations, but also because it helps users to make eﬃcient and informed
decisions (Schaferet al., 2001). Since more and more consumer purchases
are made in the online economy, it becomes essential for e-commerce
systems to be socially responsible by achieving commercial proﬁts and
beneﬁting consumers with the right decisions simultaneously. Explain-
able recommendation – as a way to help users understand why or why
not a product is the right choice – is an important technical approach
to achieving the ultimate goal of socially responsible recommendations.
5.2 Explainable Point-of-Interest Recommendation
Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation – or location recommendation
in a broader sense – tries to recommend users with potential locations
5.2. Explainable Point-of-Interest Recommendation 67
of interest, such as hotels, restaurants, or museums. Explainable POI
recommendation gained considerable interest in recent years. Most of
the research is based on datasets from POI review websites, such as
Yelp1 and TripAdvisor.2
By providing appropriate explanations in POI recommendation
systems, it helps users to save time and minimize the opportunity cost
of making wrong decisions, because traveling from one place to another
usually means extensive eﬀorts in time and money. Besides, providing
explanations in travel planning applications (such as TripAdvisor) helps
users better understand the relationship between diﬀerent places, which
could help users to plan better trip routes in advance.
In terms of explainable POI recommendation research, Wu and Ester
(2015) conducted Yelp restaurant recommendation and TripAdvisor
hotel recommendation. The authors proposed a probabilistic model
combining aspect-based opinion mining and collaborative ﬁltering to
provide explainable recommendations, and the recommended locations
are explained by a word cloud of location aspects. Baumanet al.(2017)
developed models to extract the most valuable aspects from reviews for
the restaurant, hotel, and beauty&spa recommendations on Yelp. Seo
et al.(2017) also conducted explainable restaurant recommendations on
Yelp. The authors proposed interpretable convolutional neural networks
to highlight informative review words as explanations. Zhaoet al.(2015)
conducted POI recommendation based on Yelp data in the Phoenix city
and Singapore, respectively, and the authors proposed a joint sentiment-
aspect-region modeling approach to generating recommendations. Wang
et al.(2018c) proposed a tree-enhanced embedding model for explainable
tourist and restaurant recommendation based on TripAdvisor data in
London and New York. Baralet al.(2018) proposed a dense subgraph
extraction model based on user-aspect bipartite graphs for explainable
location recommendation in location-based social networks. The results
have shown that providing appropriate explanations increases the user
acceptance on the location recommendations.
1http://www.yelp.com
2http://www.tripadvisor.com
68 Explainable Recommendation in Diﬀerent Applications
5.3 Explainable Social Recommendation
Explainable recommendations also apply to social environments. Promi-
nent examples include friend recommendations, news feeding recommen-
dations, and the recommendation of blogs, news, music, travel plans,
web pages, images, or tags in social environments.
Explainabilityof the social recommender systems is vitally important
to the users’ trustworthiness in the recommendations, and trustworthi-
ness is fundamental to maintain the sustainability of social networks
(Sherchan et al., 2013). For example, by providing the overlapping
friends as explanations for friend recommendations on Facebook, it
helps users to understand why an unknown person is related to them
and why the recommended friend would be trusted. By telling the user
which of his or her friends have twitted a piece of news as explanations
in Twitter, it helps the user to understand why the recommended news
could be important for herself. It also helps users to quickly identify
useful information to save time in the era of information overload.
Explainable recommendations in social environments are also im-
portant to the credibility of news recommendations (Bountouridiset al.,
2018). Since any individual can post and re-post news articles in the
social environment, the system may be exploited to spread fake news or
make unjustiﬁed inﬂuences on our society. By explaining the credibility
of news articles based on cross-referencing (Bountouridiset al., 2018),
we can help users to identify credible vs. fake information in social
environments, which is critical for national security.
In terms of the research on social explainable recommendation, Ren
et al.(2017) proposed a social collaborative viewpoint regression model
for rating prediction based on user opinions and social relations. The so-
cial relations not only help to improve the recommendation performance,
but also the explainability of the recommendations. Quijano-Sanchez
et al.(2017) developed a social explanation system applied to group
recommendations. It integrates explanations about the group recommen-
dations and explanations about the group’s social reality, which gives
better perceptions of the group recommendations. Tsai and Brusilovsky
(2018) studied how to design explanation interfaces for casual (non-
expert) users to achieve diﬀerent explanatory goals. In particular, the
5.4. Explainable Multimedia Recommendation 69
authors conducted an international online survey of a social recom-
mender system – based on 14 active users and across 13 countries –
to capture user feedback and frame it in terms of design principles
of explainable social recommender systems. The research results have
shown that explanations in social networks help to beneﬁt social net-
work users in terms of transparency, scrutability, trust, persuasiveness,
eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and satisfaction.
5.4 Explainable Multimedia Recommendation
Explainable multimedia recommendation broadly includes the explain-
able recommendation of books (Wang et al., 2018a), news/articles
(Kraus, 2016), music (Celma, 2010; Zhaoet al., 2019a), movies (Her-
locker et al., 2000; Nanouet al., 2010; Tintarev and Masthoﬀ, 2008),
or videos (Todericiet al., 2010). A prominent example is the YouTube
recommendation engine. Providing explanations for multimedia recom-
mendations can help users to make informed decisions more eﬃciently,
which further helps to save time by reducing unnecessary data-intensive
media transmissions through the network. We review the related work
on explainable multimedia recommendation in this section.
The MovieLens dataset3 is one of the most frequently used datasets
formovierecommendation(Herlocker et al.,2000).Basedonthisdataset,
Abdollahi and Nasraoui (2016) proposed explainable matrix factoriza-
tion by learning the rating distribution of the active user’s neighborhood.
In Abdollahi and Nasraoui (2017), the authors further extended the
idea to the explainability of constrained matrix factorization. Chang
et al.(2016) adopted crowd-sourcing to generate crowd-based natural
language explanations for movie recommendations in MovieLens. Lee
and Jung (2018) provided story-based explanations for movie recommen-
dation systems, achieved by a multi-aspect explanation and narrative
analysis method.
Based on a knowledge-base of the movies, such as the genre, type, ac-
tor, and director, recent research has been trying to provide knowledge-
aware explainable recommendations. For example, Catherine et al.
3https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/
70 Explainable Recommendation in Diﬀerent Applications
(2017) proposed explainable entity-based recommendation with knowl-
edge graphs for movie recommendation. It provides explanations by
reasoning over the knowledge graph entities about the movies. Wang
et al. (2018a) proposed the ripple network model to propagate user
preferences on knowledge graphs for recommendations. It provides ex-
planations based on knowledge paths from the user to the recommended
movie, book, or news.
Zhao et al.(2019a) studied personalized reason generation for ex-
plainable song recommendation in conversational agents (e.g., Microsoft
XiaoIce4). The authors proposed a solution that generates a natural
language explanation of the reason for recommending a song to a par-
ticular user, and showed that the generated explanations signiﬁcantly
outperform manually selected reasons in terms of click-through rate
in large-scale online environments. Davidsonet al.(2010) introduced
the YouTube Video Recommendation System, which leveraged asso-
ciation rule mining to ﬁnd the related videos as explanations of the
recommended video. Online media frequently provide news article rec-
ommendations to users. Recently, such recommendations have been
integrated into independent news feeding applications on the phone,
such as the Apple News. Kraus (2016) studied how news feeds can be
explained based on political topics.
5.5 Other Explainable Recommendation Applications
Explainable recommendation is also essential to many other applica-
tions, such as academic recommendation, citation recommendation,
legal recommendation, and healthcare recommendation. Though direct
explainable recommendation work on these topics is still limited, re-
searchers have begun to consider the explainability issues within these
systems. For example, Gaoet al.(2017) studied the explainability of
text classiﬁcation in online healthcare forums, where each sentence
is classiﬁed into three types: medication, symptom, or background.
An interpretation method is developed, which explicitly extracts the
decision rules to gain insights about the useful information in texts.
4http://www.msxiaoice.com/
5.6. Summary 71
Liu et al.(2018) further studied interpretable outlier detection for health
monitoring. In healthcare practice, it is usually important for doctors
and patients to understand why data-driven systems recommend a
certain treatment, and thus, it is important to study the explainability
of healthcare recommendation systems. It is also worth noting that ex-
plainability perspectives have also been integrated into other intelligent
systems beyond recommendation, such as explainable search (Singh and
Anand, 2019), question answering (Zhaoet al., 2019b), and credibility
analysis of news articles (Bountouridiset al., 2018).
5.6 Summary
In this section, we introduced several applications of explainable recom-
mendation to help readers understand how the key idea of explainability
works in diﬀerent recommendation scenarios. In particular, we intro-
duced explainable e-commerce, POI, social, and multimedia recommen-
dations. We also brieﬂy touched some new explainable recommendation
tasks such as explainable academic, educational, and healthcare recom-
mendations, which have been attracting increasing attention recently.
It is also beneﬁcial to discuss the potential limitations of explainable
recommendation. Although explanations can be helpful to many recom-
mendation scenarios, there could exist scenarios where explanations are
not needed or could even hurt. These include time-critical cases where
decisions should be made in real-time, and users are not expected to
spend time evaluating the decisions. For example, while driving on high-
ways, users may want to know the correct exit directly without spending
time listening to the explanations. Even more critical scenarios include
emergency medical decisions or battleﬁeld decisions, where spending
time for evaluation may not be permitted. Depending on the scenario,
explainable recommendation systems may need to avoid providing too
much explanation, and avoid repeated explanations, explaining the
obvious, or explaining in too many details, which may hurt rather than
improve the user experience. The system also needs to be especially
careful not to provide obviously misleading or even wrong explanations,
because people may lose conﬁdence in algorithms after seeing them
trying to mistakenly convince others (Dietvorstet al., 2015).
6
Open Directions and New Perspectives
We discuss some open research directions and new research perspectives
of explainable recommendation in this section. We make discussion on
four broad perspectives: methodology, evaluation, cognitive foundation,
and broader impacts.
6.1 Methods and New Applications
6.1.1 Explainable Deep Learning for Recommendation
The research community has been developing explainable deep learning
models for explainable recommendations. Current approaches focus
on designing deep models to generate explanations accompanying the
recommendation results. The explanations could come from attention
weights over texts, images, or video frames. However, the research of
explainable deep learning is still in its initial stage, and there is still
much to explore in the future (Gunning, 2017).
Except for designing deep models for explainable recommendations,
the explainability of the deep model itself also needs further research. In
most cases, the recommendation and explanation models are still black
boxes, and we do not fully understand how an item is recommended
72
6.1. Methods and New Applications 73
out of other alternatives. This is mostly because the hidden layers in
most deep neural networks do not possess intuitive meanings. As a
result, an important task is to make the deep models explainable for
recommendations. This will beneﬁt not only the personalized recommen-
dation research, but also many other research areas such as computer
vision and natural language processing, as well as their application in
healthcare, education, chatbots, and autonomous systems, etc.
Recent advances in machine learning have shed light on this problem,
for example, Koh and Liang (2017) provided a framework to analyze
deep neural networks based on inﬂuence analyses, while Pei et al.
(2017) proposed a white-box testing mechanism to help understand the
nature of deep learning systems. Regarding explainable recommendation,
this will help us to understand what are the meanings of each latent
component in a neural network, and how they interact with each other
to generate the ﬁnal results.
6.1.2 Knowledge-enhanced Explainable Recommendation
Most of the explainable recommendation research is based on unstruc-
tured data, such as texts or images. However, if the recommendation
system possesses speciﬁc knowledge about the recommendation domain,
it will help to generate more tailored recommendations and explana-
tions. For example, with the knowledge graph about movies, actors,
and directors, the system can explain to users precisely that “a movie is
recommended because he has watched many movies starred by an actor”.
Such explanations usually have high ﬁdelity scores. Previous work based
on this idea dates back to the content-based recommendation, which is
eﬀective, but lacks serendipity and requires extensive manual eﬀorts to
match the user interests with the content proﬁles.
With the fast progress of (knowledge) graph embedding techniques,
it has been possible for us to integrate the learning of graph embeddings
and recommendation models for explainable recommendation, so that
the system can make recommendations with speciﬁc domain knowledge,
and tell the user why such items are recommended based on knowledge
reasoning, similar to what humans do when asked to make recommen-
dations. It will also help to construct conversational recommendation
74 Open Directions and New Perspectives
systems, which communicate with users to provide explainable recom-
mendations based on knowledge. Moreover, in a more general sense, this
represents an important future direction for intelligent systems research,
i.e., to integrate rational and empirical approaches for agent modeling.
6.1.3 Multi-Modality and Heterogenous Information Modeling
Modern information retrieval and recommendation systems work on
many heterogeneous multi-modal information sources. For example, web
search engines have access to documents, images, videos, and audios as
candidate search results; e-commerce recommendation system works on
user numerical ratings, textual reviews, product images, demographic
information and others for user personalization and recommendation;
social networks leverage user social relations and contextual information
such as time and location for search and recommendation.
Current systems mostly leverage heterogeneous information sources
to improve search and recommendation performance, while many re-
search eﬀorts are needed to use heterogeneous information for explain-
ability. These include a wide range of research tasks such as multi-modal
explanations by aligning two or more diﬀerent information sources,
transfer learning over heterogeneous information sources for explainable
recommendations, cross-domain explanation in information retrieval and
recommendation systems, and how the diﬀerent information modalities
inﬂuence user receptiveness on the explanations.
6.1.4 Context-aware Explanations
User preferences or item proﬁles may change along with context informa-
tion such as time and location, and thus personalized recommendations
could be context-aware (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2011). The same
idea applies to explainable recommendations. Because user preferences
may change over context, the explanations could also be context-aware,
so that recommendations can be explained in the most appropriate way.
Most of the current explainable recommendation models are static, i.e.,
users are proﬁled based on a training dataset, and explanations are
generated accordingly, while context-aware explainable recommendation
needs extensive exploration in the future.
6.1. Methods and New Applications 75
6.1.5 Aggregation of Diﬀerent Explanations
Diﬀerent explainable recommendation models may generate diﬀerent
explanations, and the explanations may highly depend on the speciﬁc
model. As a result, we usually have to design diﬀerent explainable
models to generate diﬀerent explanations for diﬀerent purposes. On one
hand, researchers have shown that providing diversiﬁed explanations
is beneﬁcial to user satisfaction in recommender systems (Tsukuda
and Goto, 2019). While on the other hand, diﬀerent explanations may
not be logically consistent in explaining one item, and according to
cognitive science research, having a complete set of explanations may
not be what we need in many cases (Miller, 2019). When the system
generates many candidate explanations for a search or recommendation
result, a signiﬁcant challenge is how to select the best combination of
the explanations to display, and how to aggregate diﬀerent explanations
into a logically consistent uniﬁed explanation. Solving this problem may
require extensive eﬀorts to integrate statistical and logical reasoning
approaches to machine learning, so that the decision-making system is
equipped with the ability of logical inference to explain the results.
6.1.6 Explainable Recommendation as Reasoning
Early approaches to AI, such as Logical/symbolic AI – also known as
the Good Old-Fashioned Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GOFAI) – were highly
transparent and explainable, but they are less eﬀective in generalization
and robustness to noise. Later approaches such as machine learning
and recent deep learning are more eﬀective in learning patterns from
data for prediction, but they are less transparent due to the model
complexity and latent computation.
As a representative branch of AI research, the advancement of
collaborative ﬁltering for recommendation followed a similar path. Early
approaches to CF adopted straightforward yet transparent methods,
such as user-based (Resnicket al., 1994) or item-based (Sarwaret al.,
2001) methods, which ﬁnd similar users or items ﬁrst, and then calculate
the weighted average ratings for prediction. Later approaches to CF,
however, more and more advanced to less transparent “latent” machine
learning approaches, beginning from shallow latent factor models such
76 Open Directions and New Perspectives
as matrix factorization to deep learning approaches. Though eﬀective in
ranking and rating prediction, the key philosophy of these approaches is
to learn user/item representations and similarity networks from data for
better user-item matching, which makes it diﬃcult to understand how
the prediction network generated the output results, because the results
are usually produced by latent similarity matching instead of an explicit
reasoning procedure. To solve the problem, we need to integrate the
advantages of symbolic reasoning and machine learning – such as causal
reasoning and neural logic reasoning – so as to advance collaborative
ﬁltering to collaborative reasoning for both better recommendations
and better explainability (Chenet al., 2020; Shiet al., 2019).
6.1.7 NLP and Explainable Recommendation
Most explainable recommendation models are designed to generate some
predeﬁned types of explanations, e.g., based on sentence templates,
speciﬁc association rules, or word clouds. A more natural explanation
form could be free-text explanations based on natural language.
There has been some work trying to generate natural language ex-
planations. The basic idea is to train sentence generation models based
on user reviews and generate “review-like” sentences as explanations,
such as Liet al.(2017), Costaet al.(2018), Chenet al.(2019d), and Ni
et al.(2019). The research of generating natural language explanation
is still in its early stage, and much needs to be done so that machines
can explain themselves using natural language. For example, not all of
the review contents are of explanation purpose, and it is challenging to
cope with various noise for generating explanations. Since explanations
should be personalized, it is important to adapt pre-trained language
models such as BERT (Devlinet al., 2018) to personalized per-training
models. Explanations should also be generated beyond textual reviews,
e.g., we can integrate visual images, knowledge graphs, sentiments, and
other external information to generate more informed natural language
explanations, such as explanation with speciﬁc sentiment orientations.
Natural language explanations are also crucial for explainable conversa-
tional systems, which we will discuss in the following subsections.
6.2. Evaluation and User Behavior Analysis 77
6.1.8 Answering the “Why” in Conversations
The research of recommendation system has extended itself to multiple
perspectives, includingwhat to recommend (user/item proﬁling),when
to recommend (time-aware),where to recommend (location-based), and
who to recommend (social recommendation). Beyond these, explainable
recommendation aims at answering the question ofwhy to recommend,
which attempts to solve the problem of users’ inherent curiosity about
why a recommended item is suitable for him or her. Demonstrating
why an item is recommended not only helps users to understand the
rationality of the recommendations, but also helps to improve the system
eﬃciency, transparency, and trustworthiness.
Based on diﬀerent application scenarios, users can receive recom-
mendation explanations either passively or actively. In conventional
web-based systems such as online e-commerce, the explanations can be
displayed together with the recommended item, so that the users pas-
sively receive the explanations for each recommendation. In the emerging
environment of conversational recommendation based on smart agent
devices, users can ask “why-related” questions to actively seek for expla-
nations when a recommendation is not intuitive. In this case, explainable
recommendations will signiﬁcantly increase the scope of queries that
intelligent systems can process.
6.2 Evaluation and User Behavior Analysis
6.2.1 Evaluation of Explainable Recommendations
Evaluation of explainable recommendation systems remains a signiﬁcant
problem. For recommendation performance, explainable recommenda-
tions can be easily evaluated based on traditional rating prediction or
top-n ranking measures, while for explanation performance, a reliable
protocol is to test explainable vs. non-explainable recommendations
based on real-world user studies, such as A/B testing in practical sys-
tems, and evaluation with paid subjects or online workers on Mechanical
Turk. However, there still lacks a usable oﬄineexplainability measure
to evaluate the explanation performance.